---
layout: post
title: The Deficit Crunch
spoiler: Do our politicians remember who they're working for?
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">The Deficit Crunch</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 26, 2011</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">As the August 2 deadline for raising the nations debt nears, lawmakers are no closer to passing a final deficit reduction bill then they were three weeks ago. President Obama and Speaker Boehner are at odds again, after Boehner walked away from private discussions of a final plan.

To me, it seems like most politicians have forgotten who they are representing: the people. The people want them to make a compromise, to solve the issue and to move on to other, more important things. Both sides are making mistakes, however. President Obama, by offering to cut entitlement programs as a bargaining tool, is angering many of his elderly supporters, opening him up to the same "death panel" criticism as during the 2008 elections. The Republicans, by not taking a very generous offer of trillions of dollars in cuts in exchange for eliminating tax loopholes, are changing the public view of the party to an uncompromising, absolute bunch of lunatics. While standing your ground is good in some situations, when the country is about to default, party lines should be abandoned, and everyone should meet in the middle.

With 7 days and counting to find a solution, I hope that lawmakers can abandon their positions and come to a compromise. Otherwise, no bill will pass on this issue, and potentially on many more.</div>