---
layout: post
title: My Experiences with Complexity and Modeling
spoiler: My experiences with the Santa Fe Institute's Complexity and Modeling Program.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">My Experiences with Complexity and Modeling</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 24, 2011</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">After returning from Santa Fe Institute's Complexity and Modeling Program yesterday, I can say that I understand what it means to model a process on a computer. A model provides a graphic interface for understanding a system. While models can never capture the detail available in the real world, the abstractions they provide can often be more than enough. By demonstrating a process, it allows you to identify patterns that can emerge out of unlikely places. For example, take Langdon's Ants, a simple cellular automata. After creating an ant, we tell it to follow very simple rules:

1. If the square you are standing on is black, turn it white. Then, turn left and move forward one square.
2. If the square you are standing on is not black, turn it black. Then, turn right and move forward one square.

You might expect these rules to create a mess of squares, unrelated patterns of black and white. However, after having the ant repeat this process thousands and thousands of times, fascinating structures emerge. After a point, the ant breaks off from the mess, creating a highly composed line of repeating patterns of squares. Adding in more ants can result in even more interesting patterns.

In addition to modeling, I learned about chaotic and complex systems, and the differences between the two. Ecological data gathering made up a major part of my time there, which included looking at the wood-cutting habits of beaver, the spread of pollen by pollinators and the shape of leaves depending on their location in the forest.

NetLogo, the modeling program of choice there, is an excellent tool for both beginning programmers and modelers. It is highly reminiscent of Python, although certainly easier to learn. A full dictionary of terms is provided, as well as all other documentation on its use.

I look forward to working more with SFI in the future, and I think that modeling and complexity science certainly have a major role to play in the future of science.</div>