---
layout: post
title: My Trip to Brown University
spoiler: A chronicle of my first visit to Brown University.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">My Trip to Brown University</p>
    <p class="date-p">April 22, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
Tuesday morning. As my alarm screeched, I rolled out of bed and began the morning preparations. Luggage? Check. Laptop? Check. Breakfast? Check. My father and I hoped to leave by 7:00, although I don't know if we've ever made it out of the door on time. Either way, by the time we were on the road, it was about 7:30. Other than stopping in Newburyport for coffee, we drove straight to Providence. Thankfully, we managed to dodge rush hour traffic, and we checked in to our hotel on India Point at approximately 12:15. 
 
After depositing our luggage, we immediately set out for College Hill, which was approximately a mile away. Of course, I decided to navigate without using the map I had brought, resulting in a circuitous path to Brown that was much too long. As we approached the campus, the change in decor was noticeable. Historic homes lined the streets, and cherry trees grew overhead, replete with pink blossoms. The campus was bustling at the time, with students strolling (or running) between classes. Majestic brick buildings surrounded us, bearing Brown's seal. Construction was underway in part of the campus, so we walked through the main green, which was filled with students throwing frisbees and lying on the lawn talking. At that point, I was busy envisioning myself as part of the hubbub, a thought I found very appealing.
 
When I was preparing for the trip, I contacted several professors at Brown and asked for permission to sit in on various classes. Up first was Computational Cognitive Science, taught by Dr. Thomas Serre of the Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Studies (CLPS) department. As I still had a few minutes, I grabbed a quick lunch, and decided to wander about the Metcalf Chemical Laboratory, which houses the CLPS department. At the time, it was a sunny day in Providence, although very windy. As I strolled through the hall, many students were working inside on the stylish and comfortable furniture in sunlit study rooms. Many were working by themselves on their laptop, but some study groups had formed, reviewing homework or preparing for a test.
 
At 2:25, I wandered into the room for Computational Cognitive Science. Many people were already there, working at the computer terminals that filled the room. After a few minutes, Dr. Serre entered the room with one of his research assistants, carrying a laptop, his notes and a desk lamp. He started right in on the lecture, which began by finishing up a topic that the class had already been working on: the brain’s perception of light. We covered some of the optics of reflection and illumination, and then some of the ways that the brain can be "tricked", i.e. optical illusions. 
 
As it was an hour and twenty minute class, Dr. Serre wrapped up this section, then gave the class five minutes to stretch and talk, before diving right back in on a very different topic: predicting the end result of an event, given some arbitrary datapoint. For example, say I ask you, “You meet someone who is 18. How old will they live to be?”, and then offer you a series of choices: 18, 39, 51, 76 and 95. We dove into the probability behind the question, and then looked at some research which showed that people are good at figuring out the correct probability, even without thinking about it. We talked about many different probability distributions, such as the power-law and Gaussian. Fortunately, I had some prior experience with the topic, so I was able to keep up with the discussion. The class flew by. To wrap it up, we examined optimal approaches to the above question, and then looked at some similar inquiries, like, "You know a movie has made $10 million at the box office. How much will it make in total?" For me, a novice to cognitive science, the class was fabulous. Even though I only was able to sit in on one session, I felt like I had learned quite a bit. 
 
After the class had finished, I was able to speak with Dr. Serre for a short while about his lab and research, along with my experiences in cognitive science. Unfortunately, he had to attend to other students in the class, so I headed out to meet my father. At this point, it was after four, so we walked around the campus some more, found dinner and then retired to the hotel room for the rest of the evening.

On Wednesday, I had previously lined up three classes to sit in on. The first, Linear Algebra, began at 9:00, so I woke up at 6:00 (In retrospect, way too early). Early in the morning, it was fairly mild, although rather damp. I arrived on campus around 8:30, leaving just enough time for breakfast. Fewer students were walking around; most were probably waking up and eating within their dorms rather than going to a restaurant. As it neared nine, however, the campus sprang to life as students hurried to their first classes of the day. 

I found my way to the Barus & Holley building, where Linear Algebra was being taught by Diana Davis, a PhD student. The class started as soon as Ms. Davis entered the room, and was centered on reviewing a concept discussed the previous week, the Gram-Schmidt Algorithm. Fortunately, I had some prior linear algebra experience, so I was able to puzzle my way through the example problems. The rest of the class was very engaged, with students breaking off into groups to discuss the worksheets handed out at the start of class. To wrap it up, a student presented her method of solving the problem on the blackboard. At the end of the class, I was able to speak briefly with Ms. Davis about her research, and about the math department at Brown. 

After leaving linear algebra, I had an hour until my next class, Computer Science: An Integrated Introduction with Dr. Amy Greenwald. I spent my time reading in the open area next to the Science Library (Or SciLi). Many groups of students were sitting on the benches and lawn, either talking amicably or working on a project for a class. 
 
As it neared 11:00, I navigated through the Thomas Watson Center for Information Technology, and after looking at several maps, found my way to room 368. As a whiteboard fanatic, I was amazed by the classroom: The front wall was filled with floor to ceiling boards, while gigantic monitors stood on each side of the room, ready to display lines of code. As the room filled with people, I noticed several other prospective students, accompanied by their parents, file in. Soon thereafter, the lecture began. It focused on examples of applying breadth-first and depth-first search algorithms to graphs, a very interesting (and practical) topic for people who love computer science. Unfortunately, Dr. Greenwald had to rush out for an appointment at the end of class, so I didn't have any time to speak with her.
 
It was almost noon, so I ate my lunch on the steps of the GeoChem building. People were everywhere, filling both the green areas and every restaurant on campus. I was able to talk to several students during lunch, all of whom were very pleasant and told me a lot about life at Brown. At this point, I felt I could definitively say this would be an amazing place to go to school.
 
My next class was an upper-level computer science course, Directions: The Matrix in Computer Science, taught by Dr. Philip Klein. The class, although very interesting, was hard to understand as an outsider. A lot of the terminology referred to previous projects completed in the course, so I followed along as best I could. Dr. Klein was an excellent lecturer, and as per usual, the classroom was very impressive, outfitted with a SmartBoard and tons of comfortable desk chairs. After the class, I spoke with Dr. Klein at length about his upcoming Coursera class of the same title, and also about his personal research.  

After finishing my last class, it was still fairly light, so I decided to walk around the campus and see if I could find some students to talk to. I was able to stop a guy inside of the Watson CIT, and he was able to tell me quite a bit about the history of the computer science department at Brown. Apparently, the department was founded in part by Andy van Dam, one of the first people to ever receive a PhD in computer science. He still teaches at the university today. In addition, I learned quite a bit about the different "tracks" in the computer science department, endearingly called 14, 15, 17, 18 and 19. After thanking him, I moved on to the Barus & Holley building, which houses the engineering department. I was able to look at the campus shop briefly, and I was able to talk to an engineering major who was wandering the halls. She told me that every year, a team of students and a few professors design and build a racing car from scratch, ordering only the tires and engine, and then enter it in a competition against other schools from around the country.
By this point, it was getting dark, so I took a stroll down South Main Street and found dinner, all the while telling my father about my day. I remember saying to him (paraphrased), "When we arrived, I didn't think anyone would bother taking the time to talk to me. I'm pretty impressed that I've been able to talk to a bunch of professors and students, and more importantly, every one of them has told me something I didn't already know about Brown."

On Thursday, I woke up at 6:30, slightly correcting for my mistake on Wednesday. I had no classes scheduled, so my morning was completely open. I decided to check out the Computer Science department, which is housed on the third, fourth and fifth floors of the Watson CIT building. As I strolled through the hall, I noticed a tablet strapped to the wall next to an office, announcing "Dr. Reiss is in, please knock". So I knocked. Dr. Steven Reiss was sitting in a fabulous office, surrounded by exotic plants, books, trinkets and about seven computers (He gave off a bit of a mad scientist aura).

After introducing myself, he told me all about his assorted research projects, which included writing a programming environment for Java that offered the user real-time statistics, and cataloguing tweets in real-time by geographic location and message. In addition, he informed me that he was looking for several undergraduate computer science majors to work on his research over the summer, an avenue I’m very interested in pursuing. 

He also told me about the tablet outside his office that announced "Dr. Reiss is in, please knock". When I first saw it, I thought he must change the message from "Busy" to "I'm available" from his computer, which would be an interesting but tedious system. However, he told me that it's entirely automated. The message changes to "Busy" whenever his phone is off its receiver, or when a person is sitting on one of the chairs in front of his desk (there's a covert infrared sensor underneath the chair). In addition, it can sense when he's inside his office, and if he isn't there, it accesses his Google Calendar to determine where he might be. Over the summer, he intends to turn it into a web application for public use.

After thanking Dr. Reiss for his time, I wandered down the hall, where I found Dr. Tom Doeppner’s door open. I wandered in, and spent a while talking to Dr. Doeppner about his research, which focused on security and operating systems. We also discussed my experience with computer science. I also found out that he enjoys taking pictures of insects as a hobby - many of his photographs were hanging on the walls.

I then took some time to simply explore the common spaces in the department. Communal areas existed on every floor, and were filled with tables, whiteboards (I wrote "Ben was here" on one of them) and comfortable chairs. Not many people were using them at the time, but I'm sure that during the busier part of the day, I would be able to find many interesting discussions going on. 

As I wandered upstairs to the fifth floor, I passed Dr. David Laidlaw in the hall. I introduced myself to him, and we had a short discussion about my interest in computer science. He also invited me to sit in on his algorithms class, which was starting shortly.

The class was being taught by one of his graduate students, although Dr. Laidlaw was sitting at the front of the room. The lecture was on skip lists (a data structure), and on distributed computing. I’ll spare you the gory details, but as a student of computer science, I found the class fascinating. Afterwards, I talked with Dr. Laidlaw about his research, which focused on data visualization, and about undergraduate opportunities therein. 

At this point, it was past noon, and with a four hour drive ahead of my father and me, neither of us wanted to stay too late. So we ate lunch on campus, then headed out for an uneventful drive home.

As I was walking my dog later that evening, I had time to reflect upon my journey. In the period of three days, I discovered an amazing number of opportunities that could await me in the next phase of my life and education. Now, I just have to get there and take them.</div>