---
layout: post
title: The Fallacy of Eating Well
spoiler: Over the past few days, I've been thinking about what I eat. As we head into the winter months in Maine, opportunities to exercise decrease, and as such, I've decided to try and eat more healthily - more fruits and vegetables, less sugar and starches, no trans-fats, all that. While considering possible ways to go forward with my plan, I was struck by a sudden realization: I've always viewed eating better as an ideal, and at many points, I've tried to adhere to this model for a few days, a week, a month. However, I've never succeeded in avoiding unhealthy food entirely, much to my chagrin. Perhaps I'm simply not motivated enough, which is certainly a possibility, but I think there may be underlying psychological and social forces at play here.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">The Fallacy of Eating Well</p>
    <p class="date-p">October 7, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Over the past few days, I've been thinking about what I eat. As we head into the winter months in Maine, opportunities to exercise decrease, and as such, I've decided to try and eat more healthily - more fruits and vegetables, less sugar and starches, no trans-fats, all that. While considering possible ways to go forward with my plan, I was struck by a sudden realization: I've always viewed eating better as an ideal, and at many points, I've tried to adhere to this model for a few days, a week, a month. However, I've never succeeded in avoiding unhealthy food entirely, much to my chagrin. Perhaps I'm simply not motivated enough, which is certainly a possibility, but I think there may be underlying psychological and social forces at play here.

First, and perhaps the most obvious, is the concept of short-term reward. Often, as humans, we choose to take actions which benefit us in the short term (feeling content after eating a bowl of ice cream), but punish us in the long term (contributing to diabetes). Often, this is the result of an unequal distribution of saliency and a poor understanding of probability - the content feeling is much more realistic, and reliable than diabetes, which is fuzzy, in the future, and not certain. In addition, for some of us, an "immortality complex" may be at play. Often applied in the case of teen drunk driving, we sometimes feel as if "bad things only happen to other people", even when engaging in behaviors that make the negative effect more likely to happen to us. Whenever I hear "be careful how you eat", or warnings about poor health in the future, I know my mind automatically discounts the advice in favor of the immediate gratification right in front of me.

Second, and more noteworthy to me, is how acceptable it is to eat poorly in our society. We are constantly bombarded with advertisements for sugar and fat-filled foods, which often use the peripheral route to persuasion to convince us to indulge even when we know it isn't in our best interest. When advertisements use the peripheral route to persuasion, they associate the target behavior (for example, eating ice cream) with viscerally appealing scenes, such as an attractive woman, kids playing, or people smiling and enjoying themselves. Now, you might say, "This would never affect me!" And you might be right, consciously at least. However, subconsciously, you're slightly more likely to buy the product the next time you pass by it in the supermarket.

In addition, with the obesity "epidemic" sweeping America, it has become a common topic, and not the disgrace it used to be. I certainly don't support "shaming" anyone who is overweight, but being obese is no longer the social stigma it once was.

Finally, it's quite hard to eat well all the time. Convenient, quick food is almost always unhealthy - think  TV dinners, McDonalds, or highly processed foods. Eating healthily often requires meals to be planned ahead of time, and some preparation time for each dish, something of a "mark of death" in our hurried, "quicker-is-better" society. And unhealthy food is cheap! The food with the most calories and the lowest nutritional value is by far the cheapest food in the grocery store, while healthy food can cost many times as much for the same number of calories. I know that when I make lunch, I have a hard time convincing myself to cook a stir-fry or salad when I could make a sandwich or pasta in much less time.

Eating healthily is hard, in large part due to cultural influences. Committing yourself to eating good food doesn't just take motivation - it takes time, money and quite a bit of perseverance. If we want to reverse the "obesity epidemic", maybe we should first take aim at some of these underlying principles encouraging poor eating.