---
layout: post
title: What's Going on with the N.S.A.?
spoiler: Earlier today, the New York Times released more information from the treasure trove of documents leaked by Edward Snowden, the former N.S.A. contractor. In the article, they discuss the "Bullrun project", a top-secret initiative at the N.S.A. to develop a backdoor into encryption techniques used everywhere on the internet today.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">What's Going on with the N.S.A.?</p>
    <p class="date-p">August 18, 2011</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Earlier today, the New York Times released more information from the treasure trove of documents leaked by Edward Snowden, the former N.S.A. contractor. In the article, they discuss the "Bullrun project", a top-secret initiative at the N.S.A. to develop a backdoor into encryption techniques used everywhere on the internet today.

According to the article, the N.S.A. has been actively decoding supposedly private communication on the internet since 2010. They have done this by utilizing the "backdoor", and through more brute-force methods such as intercepting messages either pre-encryption or post-decryption, stealing private keys (for use in public key encryption), or by threatening companies with legal action if they refused access to the N.S.A..

It appears that the Bullrun project was not solely America's doing, either. Although Bullrun is a highly secretive project, top analysts at the N.S.A.'s counterparts in Canada, Britain, Australia and New Zealand were also aware of the work.

Unfortunately, the information released on the New York Times is not technical enough in detail to determine exactly how the N.S.A. is decrypting messages, and how deep the N.S.A.'s knowledge runs. Undoubtedly, this will result in another wave of media coverage, Congressional hearings, and speeches from President Obama, distracting the attention of the White House and Congress when there are more pressing issues in the world.

Although there are various civil rights which may come into play, I strongly doubt there will be any major repercussions from these revelations. Nor do I feel there should be. As with any government agency, there is always the potential for the abuse of power, and this is especially concerning when the agency in question can find out so much about the private lives of American citizens. However, the N.S.A. is certainly aware of what it can and can't use this knowledge for, because the public outcry if they overstepped their bounds would certainly be enough to sway Congress and the White House into shutting the program down. And there are certainly upsides to the surveillance programs; they certainly do play a large role in national security, despite how banal that phrase has become.

For now, we must trust that the government is working with us, and that the N.S.A. is using the data they gather for practical and relevant purposes. Create an independent oversight panel to protect against abuses of power. But don't mire the country in an unnecessary debate about data gathering at a time when there are many more significant events in the world right now.