---
layout: post
title: Searching for Meaning, and Moral Tension
spoiler: "Millennials appear to be more interested in living lives defined by meaning than by what some would call happiness," write Emily Smith and Jennifer Aaker in this morning's New York Times. In their article, entitled Millenial Searchers, they discuss the growing majority of young adults born post-1980 (millenials) who are searching for lives defined by meaning, rather than happiness or wealth as many studies have reported. In social psychology, meaning is defined as a "cognitive and emotional assessment of the degree to which we feel our lives have purpose, value and impact."
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Searching for Meaning, and Moral Tension</p>
    <p class="date-p">December 2, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">"Millennials appear to be more interested in living lives defined by meaning than by what some would call happiness," write Emily Smith and Jennifer Aaker in this morning's New York Times. In their article, entitled Millenial Searchers, they discuss the growing majority of young adults born post-1980 (millenials) who are searching for lives defined by meaning, rather than happiness or wealth as many studies have reported. In social psychology, meaning is defined as a "cognitive and emotional assessment of the degree to which we feel our lives have purpose, value and impact."

I can't speak for every millennial, but I can offer my own experiences with meaningfulness. I've had a lot of freedom in my education, which offers me small choices every day. Should I take the easy choice, and do academics with no real worth, or should I write, create art, and do other so-called productive activities? Thinking forward to college, is it okay to spend all my time on classes, with any remaining moment used socializing and gaming? (I answered the latter question with a resounding no.) It's a constant pressure, or as my dad has termed it, a "moral tension" to do better, to do more for the world, to lead a more meaningful life.

Maybe it's trivial; too small to really make a difference. But I think it's an important thing to feel. Even if I do choose to do something wholly unproductive, or to waste time, I must make a conscious choice to do so, and I have to fight this tension. At the same time, I know that without it, I wouldn't be where I am today. I might be content with getting good grades and playing games. In the article, they describe people who lead meaningful lives as feeling "connected to others, to work, to a life purpose, and to the world itself." Searching for a meaningful life should begin early in life. And there should never be a moment when you aren't aware of the lack or presence of significance to what you do.</div>