---
layout: post
title: Is It Possible to Improve at StarCraft II Without Actually Playing?
spoiler: As an avid StarCraft II player, I'm always watching for new ways to improve my game. In the past, I've played long series of games against a computer-controlled opponent, used "build-order testers" to hone a specific strategy and watched recordings of my previous games in order to identify flaws. Until now, every approach has directly utilized StarCraft in some way. Recently, I thought, "Does improving at StarCraft necessarily mean I have to play the game more?"
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Is It Possible to Improve at StarCraft II Without Actually Playing?</p>
    <p class="date-p">January 21, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
As an avid StarCraft II player, I'm always watching for new ways to improve my game. In the past, I've played long series of games against a computer-controlled opponent, used "build-order testers" to hone a specific strategy and watched recordings of my previous games in order to identify flaws. Until now, every approach has directly utilized StarCraft in some way. Recently, I thought, "Does improving at StarCraft necessarily mean I have to play the game more?" After filling several sheets of paper with scrawled thoughts and notes, I came up with a list of attributes necessary to play the game well:

1. Typing Speed
Perhaps the easiest skill to improve, having a fast typing speed is necessary for a player embroiled in a drawn-out battle. The faster you can issue commands, the more commands you can issue.

2. Mouse Accuracy and Speed
Although being able to type quickly is important, without being able to select units and move around the map quickly, pressing keys isn't important. Many players play with a high-sensitivity mouse, where an errant twitch of the wrist can send the cursor across the screen. Controlling a mouse well is of utmost importance to good play.

3. Observance of On-Screen Events / Multitasking
Occasionally, I'll watch a video of a player playing StarCraft. I don't mean a video from inside the game, but instead from behind the player, so that you can view their keyboard, mouse and screen. Although every professional player has their own preferences and styles, nobody ever sits still and watches a battle. A player might have one eye on their resources and an eye on the minimap, not to mention examining the opponent's base in order to decipher their strategy, organizing their army and creating more worker units. In the midst of a large engagement, a player may jump back to their base to begin a new upgrade or to start erecting a new building. I consider this skill at multitasking the most difficult to master - everyone wants to watch how their army fares in an engagement, and nobody wants to tear themselves away to complete more "mundane" tasks.

Training a specific skill can be difficult when ensnared in a game. With so much going on, it's hard to focus on, say, mouse accuracy. Instead, I am developing a training program in Python to simulate a specific activity in StarCraft. For example, in the mouse accuracy program, a blank window fills your screen. One by one, small black boxes appear in random locations. The challenge is to click on these boxes as quickly as possible, and with as few missed clicks as possible.

Although nobody can question the value of playing many games of StarCraft, there are other, equally valid methods of training. I look forward to plotting the results of my "training program", and to see if it correlates with an improvement in my gameplay.</div>