---
layout: post
title: Start of a New School Year
spoiler: As a homeschooled student, my definition of school year has always been fluid. I typically take one or more classes during the summer, in large part because of personal interest. Nevertheless, as public school students begin their studies, and I begin my final year in Maine before heading to Brown, I feel justified talking about "the start of the school year".
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Start of a New School Year</p>
    <p class="date-p">September 4, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
As a homeschooled student, my definition of school year has always been fluid. I typically take one or more classes during the summer, in large part because of personal interest. Nevertheless, as public school students begin their studies, and I begin my final year in Maine before heading to Brown, I feel justified talking about "the start of the school year".

Although my plans for the coming year certainly aren't set in stone, I'm looking forward to devoting much of my time to the startup company I co-founded and develop for, 4370 Inc., running a nonprofit coding club (CoderDojo), being a math tutor for local students, and my standard academic activities (blogging, math team, and assorted classes). However, I want to ensure the coming year doesn't look like a duplicate of last year, or the year before.

Due to my deferred acceptance to Brown, I'm technically done with high school (or the homeschooling equivalent thereof). Thus, I want to make sure I spend my time this year focusing on my passions and interests, unlike previous years where I had to ensure I appeared something like a "model student", with the goal of getting into my top choice schools.

I know one personal goal I want to achieve is reaching a seven (out of ten) at the annual ARML competition at Penn State in June. This will be my fifth (and final) year attending, and to date, I haven't been able to break a five. As I am unsure whether I will continue with competition math in college, this year's ARML may well be my "final hurrah".

In addition, I look forward to keeping up to date with what's going on in the world. In the past, in times when I've been stressed by events like college essays, or finals, I've slacked off with reading periodicals like the New York Times, Al Jazeera and the BBC. Now that I anticipate having more time each day to explore my interests, I fully intend to spend at least an hour daily reading, both for my own interest, and to "be a model citizen" (I know, it's clichéd).

Finally, as a teenager, I'm happy to say I can wake up later. Without having early morning classes to travel to, or a schedule packed with college essays and reports, I can get up later and work until later in the day.

All in all, I think this year will be relaxing, fun, and a great time to delve deeply into my own personal interests and passions. I can't wait!</div>