---
layout: post
title: Games in Education
spoiler: In 2008, the Pew Research Center reported that 97% of teenagers have played video games in their life. Now, they had a broad definition of "video game", which included everything from the RTS StarCraft to the popular mobile application Angry Birds. Nevertheless, this study quantifies the importance of games in everyday life. For many teens, myself included, gaming is our first thought in our free time. However, despite their importance, many still talk of gaming in a negative light. I won't deny that excessive time looking at a screen can cause damage, as can sitting for hours on end. But shouldn't we take such a widespread activity more seriously?
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Games in Education</p>
    <p class="date-p">March 19, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
In 2008, the Pew Research Center reported that 97% of teenagers have played video games in their life. Now, they had a broad definition of "video game", which included everything from the RTS StarCraft to the popular mobile application Angry Birds. Nevertheless, this study quantifies the importance of games in everyday life. For many teens, myself included, gaming is our first thought in our free time. However, despite their importance, many still talk of gaming in a negative light. I won't deny that excessive time looking at a screen can cause damage, as can sitting for hours on end. But shouldn't we take such a widespread activity more seriously? In the real world, there are many places where lessons from games could be applied (many of which are detailed in Jane McGonigal's book, Reality is Broken), from the 9-to-5 workplace to chores around the house. Although these are all excellent possibilities, I think education is the area most ripe for "gamification".

Most students in middle and high school already play games, as previously mentioned. Yet, there are few games in the day-to-day classroom. I'm aware of the computer games designed to teach math, spelling or grammar, but few (if any) students would play them outside of class. Similarly, the traditional team sports, such as football, baseball or basketball all teach some important communication and cooperation skills, but only a small subset of students would choose to participate in them. Instead, think of games that teach cooperation and thinking skills, but in a much more subtle way. For example, consider Portal, the award-winning first person puzzle game from Valve. In it, the player takes the role of a test subject who must escape a factory by using a "portal gun", or the "Aperture Science Handheld Portal Device", which can create portals between two flat planes. It's difficult to describe the game in full, so check out a trailer for the game here. In order to beat Portal, players must develop skills in lateral thinking, visualization and logic. Although none of those are typically taught in a high school curriculum, aren't they just as valuable as learning about triangles or the Cold War?

For another example, consider the MMORPG World of Warcraft. Although it has a lot of negative press, there are many valuable aspects to the game. One of the most popular activities in the game is raiding, where a group of ten or twenty players work together to defeat a monster, or "boss". In most raids, lots of teamwork is necessary to succeed in the fight. Whether your "tank" has to have the monster run around the room while the melee fighters stand on a platform to dodge the fireballs, or whether your healers have to work quickly to heal the boss up to full health while waves of undead monsters rush through the door to stop you from completing your task, completing a raid requires unparalleled communication and thinking skills. I speak from experience - I led raids for several guilds several years ago. For those students who wouldn't be caught dead holding a football, why not have classroom-wide raids?

I don't mean to suggest what's currently taught in school is unimportant. However, many teenagers view school as drudgery, or something to simply "get through". Since most teens already play video games in their spare time, why not incorporate them into the classroom? Even if it's for half an hour a day, it can only increase interest in the rest of school. And many mainstream games promote critical and lateral thinking, like Portal and World of Warcraft, among hundreds of others. So why not try to engage teens in a way that they would find fun and interesting, rather than simply lecturing to them? Games are a vital part of society, and they will be for the foreseeable future. Lets put them into school, one of the only places where they're still actively discouraged.</div>