---
layout: post
title: Why We Love The Radio
spoiler: Yesterday, while listening to the radio, one of my favorite songs came on. Needless to say, I listened to it, perhaps sang along a bit, et cetera. However, later that evening, while listening to Spotify on shuffle, the same song came up. You might think that, being a favorite song, I'd have happily listened to it again. However, I pressed the "next song" button without a second thought, and kept pressing it until I found a song I was moderately happy listening to. But wait! Why would I be happy listening to the song on the radio, but not on Spotify? I wasn't sick of hearing it, in fact, I still listen to the song at least once a day. I think the answer to this question lies in psychology.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Why We Love The Radio</p>
    <p class="date-p">October 25, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Yesterday, while listening to the radio, one of my favorite songs came on. Needless to say, I listened to it, perhaps sang along a bit, et cetera. However, later that evening, while listening to Spotify on shuffle, the same song came up. You might think that, being a favorite song, I'd have happily listened to it again. However, I pressed the "next song" button without a second thought, and kept pressing it until I found a song I was moderately happy listening to. But wait! Why would I be happy listening to the song on the radio, but not on Spotify? I wasn't sick of hearing it, in fact, I still listen to the song at least once a day. I think the answer to this question lies in psychology.

When listening to the radio, two forces are at play. First, you have very little control - you can switch to a different station, but they control what music is played, and how often you hear a specific song. Second, you're taking a bet by changing the station if a song you moderately like comes on - you might find something better, but you might only hear commercials, and then by the time you return to the original station, you've missed half the song.

On the other hand, when listening to Spotify, iTunes or any similar service, you have complete control. You can listen to any song you want at any time as many times as you would like. And if you don't feel like hearing a song right now, you can go on to something else, then come back to it later. Many people say this feature is the most important aspect of these services - you can listen to whatever, whenever. However, there's a dark side to the abundance of choice, illustrated by a well-known psychology experiment.

In the experiment, subjects were shown a row of posters depicting artwork, and were told that as a reward for participating in the study, they could choose a poster to take home with them. Here's the tricky part - one group of subjects was told that their choice was final. Whatever poster they chose couldn't be returned, or exchanged. Alternatively, the other group was told that they could exchange the poster for another whenever they wanted to, simply by mailing it back, and the researchers would even cover the cost of postage.

Seems simple, right? Obviously the group who could trade in their poster would be happier, since they could try each one out, and choose the one best for them. However, the researchers found the exact opposite! Surprisingly, people who were stuck with their first choice were by far happier with their poster when asked. Further studies have identified a statement that seems to be true about humans in general - we learn to like what we're stuck with. For example, if you're stuck in an unpleasant job, but can't quit for financial and legal reasons, you're likely to rationalize and find reasons why it isn't so bad. However, if you're working, but don't really need the money, you're likely to be less happy with the job overall.

The next time you're confounded by a multitude of options, the best choice might be to make your choice quickly and force yourself to stick with it. The radio, although dated, might still be your best option.