---
layout: post
title: To Be a 'Gamer'
spoiler: "He gamed the system." "She's a gamer." "He spends most of his time gaming."

When I hear any version of the three sentences above, I cringe inside. All three of them are typically used to portray either the word or action of gaming in a negative light. In our culture of games, we shouldn't be apprehensive at the idea that someone might identify themselves as a "gamer", and it's a habit we'll need to change as games penetrate every aspect of our daily life, from education, to the workplace.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">To Be a 'Gamer'</p>
    <p class="date-p">October 29, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
"He gamed the system." "She's a gamer." "He spends most of his time gaming."

When I hear any version of the three sentences above, I cringe inside. All three of them are typically used to portray either the word or action of gaming in a negative light. In our culture of games, we shouldn't be apprehensive at the idea that someone might identify themselves as a "gamer", and it's a habit we'll need to change as games penetrate every aspect of our daily life, from education, to the workplace.

As an avid gamer myself, I rarely sense approval when I tell people about my hobby. More often, I get the sense that although nobody would openly criticize me for gaming, few approve of it as a way to spend a good portion of my awake time. And god forbid I say that I play World of Warcraft, the game so often associated with addiction it's practically become a byline for it. People often forget that  over nine million people play the game, and a minuscule percentage of them would qualify as addicted. Not to mention the fact that plenty of high profile businesspeople either play or have played World of Warcraft, such as MIT Media Lab director Joichi Ito.

I think that in the past, gaming was sometimes associated with an inability or disinterest in interacting  with the real world, where the game world provided a respite. However, escaping from the real world can seem like a very negative concept, so let me put those fears to rest. Although I can't say I've played a majority of games, or even MMORPGs, it is completely untrue that when gaming, you aren't thinking or being social. In fact, it's the complete opposite - games like WoW and League of Legends are more intensely social than most other activities, and require a whole host of skills, ranging from critical thinking to teamwork. Studies have even shown that surgeons who play games perform better on the operating table, and that games can improve cognitive skills in seniors.

In a world where an overwhelming percent of the populace plays games of one sort or another, we simply can't afford to criticize people who choose to make them an integral part of their lives. One of the best ways to change this habit might be to try a game yourself, and see why they're so enjoyable. You never know, you might be a gamer at heart as well.</div>