---
layout: post
title: Are Sports Downgrading High School Education?
spoiler: Last month, the Atlantic published a front-page story entitled, "The Case Against High-School Sports". In it, the author, Amanda Ripley, discusses how integral a role sports play in the American high school experience, and why they may be causing us to drop in international education rankings. She contrasts the U.S. with countries that have very successful schools, such as South Korea, Germany and Shanghai. In these other countries, although sports are often played by high school students, they have no affiliation with the school, and are instead club sports, played casually in a field after school.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Are Sports Downgrading High School Education?</p>
    <p class="date-p">November 5, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Last month, the Atlantic published a front-page story entitled, "The Case Against High-School Sports". In it, the author, Amanda Ripley, discusses how integral a role sports play in the American high school experience, and why they may be causing us to drop in international education rankings. She contrasts the U.S. with countries that have very successful schools, such as South Korea, Germany and Shanghai. In these other countries, although sports are often played by high school students, they have no affiliation with the school, and are instead club sports, played casually in a field after school.

Some statistics support her view - the percent of high school students who play sports is much higher than the percent who take at least one Advanced Placement (AP) class a year. And according to a study published in the Journal of Advanced Academics, eighth-grade American students spend more than twice the amount of time playing high school sports than Korean students of the same age.

Later in the month, Daniel Bowen and Colin Hitt came back with a response entitled, "High-School Sports Aren't Killing Academics". They cite statistics showing that schools with higher sports participation rates have lower dropout rates, and higher standardized test scores, and argue that there are plenty of counterexamples to sports hurting academics. After all, Massachusetts, which has one of the best education systems in the world, has approximately the same sports participation rates as Mississippi, which ranks about the same as Trinidad and Tobago internationally.

Obviously, I can't argue either case without a wealth of statistics to back me up. However, I think that the virtues of athleticism may be overrated. Ripley, who played soccer from age seven to seventeen, rattles off a list of the benefits of high school sports: "exercise, lessons in sportsmanship and perseverance, school spirit, and just plain fun". And while all of these are important to being a healthy individual, they are often lauded as being, for example, integral to being accepted to a good college. 

 
I strongly disagree. Obviously, as a homeschooled student headed off to an Ivy League school, my education has been unusual, to say the least. But I did go through the college admissions process, and I read countless articles from admissions officers discussing how they manage to differentiate between the student who is accepted, and the one who isn't. At top-ranked schools, they receive a vast number of applications from students who fit the mold of the well-rounded scholar - valedictorian, plenty of AP classes, musician, athlete. In article after article, I heard the same line, "It's not what you did in school; not the typical academic achievements. It's what you did outside of school that you were passionate about." And while there most certainly are incredibly talented high school athletes who are passionate about their sports, they make up a very small percentage of the number of high school athletes in total. I would argue that being an athlete is no longer anything special to colleges, it's simply another box that gets checked on your admissions packet. Does it hurt your chances of getting in? No. But the vast amount of time that a sport requires could probably be better spent on any number of other activities which would improve your chances much more drastically. You might ask, "What about those virtues?" I would respond that while learning teamwork, sportsmanship or perseverance is important, they can be learned in venues other than a sports team. Is there any reason to think that the informal sports clubs in Germany or South Korea don't teach these same morals? 
 
Finally, I'd like to discuss my own experience with the divide between sports and academics. I'm the captain of the local high school math team, which, as I've discussed in the past, is not overly successful. We were the top team in Maine for over a decade straight, back in the '80s and '90s. But now, we can barely muster the ten people needed for a meet, and on the day of the competition, many participants have barely practiced for it. The most common reason for missing the bi-weekly practices is, you got it, sports practice. At the local school, sports practice five days a week, and there's no chance of being exempted from practice one day a week for an academic extracurricular. 
 
How ridiculous. Some students, like the second highest scorer on our team, can't make it to any practices for the first three months of the year because of a sports team. In specific, that student has cross-country running. Come spring, he'll be able to attend practice weekly, but that won't help his scores for the first three competitions. I can understand why coaches wouldn't want team members skipping practice on a whim, but for an academic pursuit? I mean, come on, they aren't coaching professional players. This kind of absolutism is harmful to any student who wants to pursue multiple extracurriculars, and simply shouldn't exist in our society today.
 
In conclusion, there's no hard proof that playing sports directly degrades your academic performance. But there are plenty of instances of athletics taking up time that could be used for more valuable activities, all because we overvalue the importance of high school athleticism. As we continue to drop in international education rankings, maybe we'll figure out that we should set down the ball, and pick up the pencil.</div>