---
layout: post
title: 2030: Education
spoiler: 2012 was a big year for education. The massive open online course, or MOOC, grew from obscurity into a worldwide phenomenon. Coursera, Udacity, EdX. Every company has tens, if not hundreds of courses from top universities like Harvard, Princeton and Duke, all free, ranging from "Genetics and Evolution" to "Songwriting". Brick and mortar institutions are beginning to treat the MOOC as a viable education option.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">2030: Education</p>
    <p class="date-p">February 3, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
2012 was a big year for education. The massive open online course, or MOOC, grew from obscurity into a worldwide phenomenon. Coursera, Udacity, EdX. Every company has tens, if not hundreds of courses from top universities like Harvard, Princeton and Duke, all free, ranging from "Genetics and Evolution" to "Songwriting". Brick and mortar institutions are beginning to treat the MOOC as a viable education option. Recently, Antioch University partnered with Coursera so that students at Antioch can, for a fee, take courses online instead of sitting in a classroom. Now, these companies are attempting to monetize the MOOC. Coursera recently unveiled a "Signature Track" for select courses. In exchange for a fee on the order of $50, they will verify your identity, and upon completion of the class, you will receive a certificate from the university offering the class. In 2013, I expect the MOOC to grow exponentially. Soon, not offering online courses may be more "expensive" to a university than the revenue loss from giving away classes.

I don't believe that the MOOC is a fad; it is here to stay, and it will change how we think about college. Nothing online will ever replace the "college experience", and the prestige of having Harvard, Oxford or Yale on your resumé will never fade. However, for those who have never had access to higher education, the MOOC is a gateway. Soon, a degree will not be required for every white-collar job. Instead, practical experience and relevant courses online will be enough. As tuition rises, fewer and fewer families will be able to afford a typical four-year degree, and more will move online. By 2030, I predict that only the elite will attend a "real-life" university. I predict that as more people in countries such as India and China gain access to higher education online, the job market will grow increasingly competitive, until there are thousands of applicants for every job. And I predict that instead of completing what is now the traditional education path (high school, college and graduate) before entering the workforce, most people will be simultaneously working at a desk and learning new skills relevant to their job.

By 2030, K-12 education will have been redone. A major legislative initiative will address America's slipping rankings in education. Although the traditional school will never be abolished, more classrooms will utilize companies like Khan Academy and the Art of Problem Solving, with teachers guiding and helping students instead of lecturing to them. And the 9-to-3 model will change, with some schools opting to eliminate "summer break", while others may just lengthen the school day. For many students, high school and college will no longer be separate entities - with the advent of online college courses, many high schools will offer the opportunity to take classes through a MOOC for some portion of the day. The tech school will be reinvented. Today, many consider it to be a place for those who just didn't fit into normal school. It will become a place for the makers, the inventors and the creators. The people who work with their hands, who develop the new technologies and reinvent the old ones. By 2030, instead of K-12, which suggests that learning ends at graduation, we will have K-?.

Education is changing quickly. As a student preparing to enter college, I feel lucky to be able to partake of these new opportunities. And although I say 2030, it could easily be 2020, or even 2015. Soon, education will no longer be a sideshow to the economy. It will eclipse Wall Street and the Federal Reserve in importance to the country. I eagerly await these changes, pen and notebook in hand.</div>