---
layout: post
title: Science and the Humanities
spoiler: In August, Steven Pinker, the Harvard psychologist, published an article in The New Republic entitled "Science is not the Enemy of the Humanities". The article begins as an impassioned defense to the idea that science is the basis for practically everything, and takes a questioning stance to why popular culture is often seemingly repudiated by the idea that science often becomes involved in matters of religion, popular culture, or the humanities. In addition, he discusses "scientism", or the idea that everything can and should be explained in terms of scientific principles. Pinker summarizes his views by stating that science is "indispensable in all areas of human concern, including politics, the arts, and the search for meaning, purpose and morality". 
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Science and the Humanities</p>
    <p class="date-p">October 31, 2013</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">In August, Steven Pinker, the Harvard psychologist, published an article in The New Republic entitled "Science is not the Enemy of the Humanities". The article begins as an impassioned defense to the idea that science is the basis for practically everything, and takes a questioning stance to why popular culture is often seemingly repudiated by the idea that science often becomes involved in matters of religion, popular culture, or the humanities. In addition, he discusses "scientism", or the idea that everything can and should be explained in terms of scientific principles. Pinker summarizes his views by stating that science is "indispensable in all areas of human concern, including politics, the arts, and the search for meaning, purpose and morality". 

Pinker goes on to attack the boundary between science and the humanities (Note: from here on out, when I refer to "the humanities", I also mean the arts). Although he attempts to show that science has value in every aspect of human life, it instead feels as if he is claiming science is the ultimate answer. He then laments the so-called assault on science by our culture - for example, the refusal of our institutions to accept science as an integral part of life, or "the blaming of science for political movements with a pseudoscientific patina, particularly Social Darwinism and eugenics".

He summarizes his view of the barrier between science and the humanities as follows:

"The humanities are the domain in which the intrusion of science has produced the strongest recoil. Yet it is just that domain that would seem to be most in need of an infusion of new ideas. By most accounts, the humanities are in trouble. University programs are downsizing, the next generation of scholars is un- or underemployed, morale is sinking, students are staying away in droves. No thinking person should be indifferent to our society’s disinvestment from the humanities, which are indispensable to a civilized democracy."
Although I'm glad that Pinker tips his hat to the necessity of humanities in a functioning society, the rest of the article suggests a myriad of ways that humanities could be updated, even upgraded with new scientific discoveries, along with a sharp critique of those who would say that applying science to the humanities is, "simplistic, reductionist, naïve, vulgar, and of course, scientistic".

Let me first state that I am very familiar with the scientific process, and of course, no scientifically-literate person can deny that it is a useful and successful way of finding and proving new discoveries. In addition, I am a computer science major, and I have dabbled in many other branches of science. However, I think Pinker takes his argument too far. Yes, in the end, everything does come down to science of one sort or another, although Pinker notes that this kind of breakdown is not necessary in most venues. But more importantly, science is not wanted in many fields of human culture. Sure, we can debunk plenty of religious dogma, but in the end, religion is not about finding the intelligible answer to everything, as science is. And yes, we can explain much of politics in terms of social psychology, neuroscience and even genetics, but here, science adds nothing of value to the debate. In literature, or English, or numerous other humanities, science is just not wanted.

Now, I agree with Pinker that there should be no war between science and the humanities. It's a free society, and there is plenty of room for scientific exploration in other fields. But I cannot say that the aforementioned assault on science is wholly unjustified. If I was, say, an English professor, this article would feel both threatening and aggressive. And for the general public, science is often portrayed as force unto itself, with little explanation behind it, and no way to deny it. Although the "assault" is unnecessary, it does bring up some important issues which I want to discuss a bit further.

First and foremost, this assault suggests a problem with scientific literacy in our society. An oft-cited example is that of explaining why we (humans) have caused climate change - although the science is practically indisputable, it has been very poorly communicated, and as such, it is not taken as absolute. The result, as seen in the government of the United States, is that climate change is still a theory, and we are still debating whether it exists, let alone what kind of action should be taken.

Now, the solution to this problem is most certainly not that everyone should become a scientist. But it does call for a reengineering of how we teach science in middle and high school, and even college. At its heart, science is a process to explain observations about the world, and in general, after a lengthy procedure, it does come up with the correct reasons. Simply improving the scientific literacy rate could put to rest many improper applications of science in popular culture and media.

Second, new is not always better. Pinker portrays many humanities professors as being conservative; unwilling to let their field enter a new era. However, he implies that there is no value to conservatism. An example of the contrary is the American political system. Although I consider myself a progressive liberal, I do not deny the necessity of the conservative Republican party. Even the Constitution disagrees with him - the Senate was created to be a "conservative" institution, the makeup of which changed slowly over time, whereas the House was intended to change with the year-to-year whims of the country. Obviously, these aren't the same thing, but the point is still valid - throwing new ideas and discoveries into old, venerable fields doesn't always yield good results.

I'd like to conclude this article by discussing an article published in the New York Times this morning, entitled "As Interest Fades in the Humanities, Colleges Worry" (For those interested in reading a proper rebuttal to Steven Pinker's article, Leon Wieseltier wrote a reply in The New Republic here.) The article in the Times discusses the flagging number of humanities graduates, while the number of graduates in the sciences only increases. Pinker would call this an example of the failing of the humanities, I think it's a well disguised positive feedback loop.

It has been well documented (and mocked) the trouble that humanities graduates have finding a job in the current economy. Majoring in art history has practically become a figurehead for a useless degree. And of course, there are countless college advisory websites telling you to consider a degree in a STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Math) field.

I'm not surprised that the number of humanities graduates is falling, nor do I fault students who switch to a science major. With college tuition ever increasing, few people have the luxury of not needing a job as soon as they graduate. And so, they take the major that has the highest pay, and the most career opportunities. It makes me wonder whether the humanities major has been relegated to the well-off student who does not need to worry as much about the practical applications of their field and the student who may know better, but chooses to stand up for their interests anyhow. I digress, though. My point is that as the number of graduates in STEM fields increases, the want for those graduates should increase in kind as more companies are founded, research expands, and new industries open up, thus encouraging more and more students to switch to these areas of study. A slowly growing feedback loop it may be, but over time, this could lead to the gradual erosion of the humanities major.

As a science major, I feel strange writing this article. I devote time every week to teaching young students to program, but never to teaching journalism or history. And I hope to see more STEM graduates doing amazing things. But the English major and the art history play an important role in our society, and I wouldn't see them disappear because they're "outdated" and not "modern". I guess this is a call to arms for our society, to give young humanities followers a reason to believe their field is as valued as physics or computer science, and to not discourage them from following their passions. Only then will we see a reversion in the number of humanities graduates.

Science may be able to find a solution or explanation to every part of human life, but in many places, it's simply not needed nor wanted. Rather than trying to force it down anyone's throat, there needs to be a balance between the new and the old, the progressive and the conservative. Humanities and the arts may not be able to explain life fundamentally, but what would life be without them? Without the happiness created by Shakespeare, Rembrandt, Dickinson, or the new authors who just published their first novel?