---
layout: post
title: Commencement Controversy
spoiler: The American bison has a tragic story. Nearly hunted to extinction in the 19th century, today the bison reside only in a few national parks and reserves. Thanks to timely intervention, today bison are rated as "Near Threatened", four big steps away from extinct.
 
The little brown bat shares the bisons' plight. This time however, the hunter is no longer human. White-nose Syndrome, Geomyces destructans, a fungus newly introduced to America, is sweeping through little brown bat colonies, and has killed more than a million bats since it was first discovered five years ago. Bats in nineteen states have been diagnosed with White-nose Syndome (WNS), and it only continues to spread. The survival rate of the disease is scarily low: less than ten percent of infected bats live. The truly scary part? We have no idea what we can do to stop it.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Commencement Controversy</p>
    <p class="date-p">May 20, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Last week, a series of universities canceled their commencement speeches after student protests. Rutgers University and Smith College withdrew their invitations to Condoleezza Rice and Christine Lagarde, respectively. Brandeis and Haverford also canceled their addresses. I, and a good portion of the media, believes that this was a poor decision.

First and foremost, the small group of students took away a valuable opportunity from the rest of their class. Personally, I would have loved to have a former Secretary of State or the current head of the International Monetary Fund speak, even if I did disagree with some of the decisions they had made during their career. I'm sure that many other graduating seniors at these schools felt the same way.

Next, the actions of these students went against the basic principle that college should serve to broaden your worldview and expose you to opinions that contrast starkly with your own. I am no fan of the decisions Condoleezza Rice made in office, but if she wanted to speak on those decisions and give her own justification for them, I would certainly be game to listen. Several authors have suggested that these cancellations are a sign that the millennial generation are unwilling or unable to listen to viewpoints that contrast with their own. I don't think it should be taken that strongly, but I do believe that some students have come to the incorrect conclusion that they have nothing to learn from these speakers.

Even if these speakers chose not to talk on controversial matters and to just give general advice to the graduates, it would be an incredibly important experience. Rice is a graduate of Yale, a National Security Advisor, Secretary of State, and a Provost of Stanford. Lagarde is the leader of one of the world's most important financial institutions, and is definitely one of the most powerful women on the planet. Both of them have plenty of professional, educational and life experience to share, and undoubtedly would be able to give a speech I'd like to hear.

Every student who protested will have to work closely with people who have views diametrically opposite theirs. They will hear those views. It's important to know how to handle people with different opinions, and how to get along peacefully with them. These students showed poor judgment and a lack of maturity in getting these speeches canceled, and hopefully the response from the media and public will show them that.</div>