---
layout: post
title: Success in Three Steps
spoiler: Amy Chua is a controversial figure. Several years ago, she wrote a book, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, chronicling her experiences with Chinese parenting. Perhaps the most oft cited paragraph in the book is on the back cover: "Here are some things my daughters, Sophia and Louisa, where never allowed to do: Attend a sleepover Have a playdate...
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Success in Three Steps</p>
    <p class="date-p">January 31, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Amy Chua is a controversial figure. Several years ago, she wrote a book, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, chronicling her experiences with Chinese parenting. Perhaps the most oft cited paragraph in the book is on the back cover:

"Here are some things my daughters, Sophia and Louisa, where never allowed to do:
Attend a sleepover
Have a playdate
Be in a school play
Complain about not being in a school play
Watch TV or play computer games
Choose their own extracurricular activities
Get any grade less than an A
Not be the #1 student in every subject except gym and drama
Play any instrument other than the piano or violin
Not play the piano or violin"
 Her book shook up the Western parenting world and likely influenced thousands of childhoods. And now, Chua has returned with a new analysis of childhood development. On Sunday, she and her husband published an op-ed piece in the New York Times, entitled "What Drives Success?" In the article, she explores the three traits that many successful ethnic groups possess, which she claims are the direct cause of being successful.

"It turns out that for all their diversity, the strikingly successful groups in America today share three traits that, together, propel success. The first is a superiority complex — a deep-seated belief in their exceptionality. The second appears to be the opposite — insecurity, a feeling that you or what you’ve done is not good enough. The third is impulse control."
Sound contradictory? Maybe. I find it hard to believe that having these three traits is the only, or even primary, way to be successful. Plenty of people have made incredible contributions to the world who have had low self-esteem, or who have indulged themselves at every turn.

I have my own experiences with this trifecta of sorts. I have the superiority complex. I've always believed that I can be the best if I push myself. Same with the insecurity - no matter how much I achieve, I know that I could, and should, be doing more. I would define it simply as being aware of how little I have done, and how much more is possible. On the third trait, I'm weakest, and it's definitely a roadblock.

So maybe Chua is right about the triad. But it's an uneasy balance at best. Sacrificing one trait can wreck the entire system, and when one of the three starts to grow, it can trigger the downfall of the other two. Nevertheless, she has a fresh, controversial perspective on success, much as her earlier book upset the time-honored art of parenting. I look forward to reading her book on the topic, co-written with her husband, The Triple Package: How Three Unlikely Traits Explain the Rise and Fall of Cultural Groups in America.</div>