---
layout: post
title: Academic Coaching
spoiler: In a post yesterday on the New York Times's Motherlode blog, Jennifer Arrow lays out a case for parents acting as "academic coaches". In many Asian cultures, parents view it as their duty to train and coach their children in academics, much as a sports coach trains children in America. Dr. Quanyu Huang, a professor at Miami University in Ohio, argues that, "Education is a life-or-death struggle. Education is a battle of elimination won through selection and competition. … For Chinese and Chinese-American children, their introduction to education is the beginning of a lifelong battle that they must win at any and all costs.”
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Academic Coaching</p>
    <p class="date-p">April 10, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">In a post yesterday on the New York Times's Motherlode blog, Jennifer Arrow lays out a case for parents acting as "academic coaches". In many Asian cultures, parents view it as their duty to train and coach their children in academics, much as a sports coach trains children in America. Dr. Quanyu Huang, a professor at Miami University in Ohio, argues that, "Education is a life-or-death struggle. Education is a battle of elimination won through selection and competition. … For Chinese and Chinese-American children, their introduction to education is the beginning of a lifelong battle that they must win at any and all costs.”

In America, academics is often viewed as the domain of the teacher, and not of the parent. Other than enforcing that homework is completed every night, a parent often has little involvement in a child's scholastic career. Contrast that with athletics, where parents attend every home game, drive kids to and from practice, invest in training camps, and often help the child practice in their spare time. Amanda Ripley, the author of the widely publicized article in the Atlantic entitled, "The Case Against High-School Sports", argues that this commitment to sports is found only in America. In South Korea, a country that tops international education rankings on a regular basis, sports are played on a dirt field with equipment brought from home. Any awards or notice awarded to students is for academic achievement, not athletics.

One cause of this difference in priorities might be a form of attribution error. Often, I hear parents talk about how, for example, math wasn't "their" topic, as if some people are born naturally gifted at algebra, and some aren't. However, with sports, everyone is encouraged to try, with the idea that any student could be the next professional athlete. In short, we often attribute academic success to genetics or some innate talent, rather than hard work, so the idea of coaching academics seems ridiculous. In contrast, athletic skill can always be improved upon, so we take great pains to ensure that our kids have every opportunity to improve at sports.

Secondly, academics in America has been gifted entirely to the school system. It is expected that the seven or eight hours spent in classes is enough, and that parents shouldn't need to put in any more work beyond that point. A school requiring parents to act as academic coaches might be viewed as a failure; a school in need of better teachers. However, the arguments for parental involvement in education are strong. Whether you look at South Korea, China, or any other top-ranking country, kids aren't going the scholastic journey alone. Even in America, parents who support their kids as they go through school and who take an interest in academic goings-on will undoubtedly see results for their children.

School shouldn't be a one-person journey. Asian cultures have already figured this out, and parents often act as academic coaches for their children, drilling multiplication tables, reading to them, or taking them to visit colleges. In contrast, America tends to focus on athletics instead of academics, and we often think of school being isolated - children should learn everything from their teacher, with no parent buy-in. And we're seeing the results - America is falling further and further behind our Asian counterparts. We should take the hint. So, parents, give it a try - the next time you're washing the dishes, ask your kid, "What's eleven times thirteen?"</div>