---
layout: post
title: An Israel Summary
spoiler: Israel and Palestine have slaughtered countless civilians. How can we minimize the number of casualties and pave the way for long-term peace?
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">An Israel Summary</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 23, 2014</p>
</div>
<div class="content-div">
First, let me say that like many other people in this thread, I believe Israel should take every possible step to preserve the lives of innocent Palestinians/Gazans. You can’t make excuses for the deaths of innocents – it’s always bad.

However, Israel has said that it is targeting Hamas, which is a terrorist group masquerading as a government. A very large percentage (63%, according to David Brooks) of Palestinians don’t like Hamas, and would prefer them gone. In addition, Israel has utilized very humanitarian methods of warfare – significantly more humanitarian than we ever have.

Okay, so Israel has the right goal, but the goal has caused the deaths of hundreds of Palestinians. Here is where people seem to diverge on opinions. I support a continued, and expanded, military operation, while many other people seem to support withdrawing or reducing military activity. Here’s why I believe that Israel is right to continue their operation, although I think the scope of it should change:

First, Hamas is actively bombing Israel, not to mention sending squads of soldiers into civilian areas through tunnels and attacking the military. At this point, don’t consider the low death toll of Israel. Were any militant group, country or other organization to even launch a missile at America, it would be taken as an act of war, even if there were no casualties.

Israel’s minuscule death toll doesn’t affect anything – Hamas is still shooting to kill. In fact, many of their missiles are aimed for residential areas in which there is no military activity. Were Israel to not have the Iron Dome, the death toll would be much higher, because of Hamas. Just because Israel happens to have advanced technology that has saved the lives of many citizens doesn’t mean that the launching of the missiles shouldn’t be taken as an aggressive act that must be responded to.

Secondly, Hamas is similar to Al Qaeda or any other militant group in how it operates. It is not a centralized military – it is an assorted group of fighters with weapons and missiles stashed around Gaza. Destroying a few tunnels and rocket launchers here and there will do nothing. Hamas will simply return with more weapons.

Now, I don’t think haphazardly shooting missiles at Hamas’s missile launchers is the correct solution, even with the humanitarian steps Israel is taking. Israel has to occupy Gaza, even if only temporarily, just to wipe all of Hamas out of the strip. In the end, were this to happen, I believe that Israel and Gaza would be left for the better. Here’s why:

1. Hamas, the pretend-government that has repeatedly shown a lack of regard for Palestinian life, would be removed from the city.

2. Ideally, an occupation would take place with fewer civilian deaths than the current campaign of missile launching, meaning that relations with Gazans would be on better terms. In the end, any remotely non-militaristic solution will rely on joining the Israelis and Palestinians toward a common goal, which won’t happen if civilians keep dying on either side.

3. With Hamas gone, borders could be opened up to allow for humanitarian aid. I won’t deny that the situation in Gaza is horrible, but I don’t see it getting better without a full invasion.

Some people here have advocated for a complete withdrawal by Israel – open the borders, get out of Gaza, etc. While the idea is commendable, and would improve the quality of life for many Gazans, it wouldn’t solve the problem of Hamas. In many places, Hamas has repeatedly said that it is fighting Israel for religious reasons, none of which will be solved by a peacemaking gesture from Israel. So if Israel were to withdraw, Hamas would continue shooting missiles, and would only pull the area back into conflict.

In summary, the only way to maintain long-term peace in the region is to eliminate Hamas and start building communal ties between Palestine and Israel. However, there is no way to eliminate Hamas without a full occupation. Without a full occupation, they will simply spring up again and continue shooting missiles. Any occupation should be done with the greatest possible concern for innocent lives. But we cannot simply expect Israel to weather a constant barrage of missiles from Hamas, which is what will happen if they sit back and don’t take any proactive measures.</div>