---
layout: post
title: Why Net Neutrality Is a Big Deal
spoiler: Last Wednesday, the Federal Communications Commission announced that it would propose new guidelines allowing for the creation of web "fast lanes". In essence, the ruling will allow for companies to pay internet service providers to serve their content at a faster rate. Companies like Netflix, Facebook or Google obviously benefit tremendously from this policy change, as they can afford to pay ISPs for access to this fast lane, whereas smaller companies or startups are affected negatively, as they won't be able to pay for the premier service.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Why Net Neutrality Is a Big Deal</p>
    <p class="date-p">April 28, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Last Wednesday, the Federal Communications Commission announced that it would propose new guidelines allowing for the creation of web "fast lanes". In essence, the ruling will allow for companies to pay internet service providers to serve their content at a faster rate. Companies like Netflix, Facebook or Google obviously benefit tremendously from this policy change, as they can afford to pay ISPs for access to this fast lane, whereas smaller companies or startups are affected negatively, as they won't be able to pay for the premier service.

Aside from major companies, almost nobody supports these rule changes, and in the 2008 presidential race, now-President Obama even said that he was strongly in favor of net neutrality, i.e. keeping the internet equal for everyone. He said,

“The answer is yes. I am a strong supporter of net neutrality. What you’ve been seeing is some lobbying that says that the servers and the various portals through which you’re getting information over the Internet should be able to be gatekeepers and to charge different rates to different Web sites…. And that I think destroys one of the best things about the Internet—which is that there is this incredible equality there.”

Either President Obama's opinion has changed on the matter, or the F.C.C. chairman, Thomas Wheeler, is pushing a different agenda. So why should we, as consumers, care about net neutrality or the lack thereof?

Back in 2004, Facebook existed only in a Harvard dorm room. If you compared the first version of the website to the current version, it would look completely different. It consisted of five students. For years, Facebook was nothing compared to MySpace and other social networks. But it garnered enough of a following to make it into the big time, and now it has over a billion users. Most of the websites we now use on a daily basis had a similar start - a few visionaries with a good idea who put in hard work and came out with a working website. In many senses, it's the embodiment of the American spirit: Anyone who works hard enough can come out on top.

If the F.C.C. puts these new rules into effect, this culture of innovation is put in danger. When ISPs can provide premium service to established companies who can afford to pay, small companies can't compete. Consumers will be less likely to use a website that loads more slowly, when they could get fast treatment with the mainstream option. In some sense, net neutrality ensures that the internet titans like Apple, Facebook or Google can be toppled by small upstarts, which is critical to the culture of innovation in Silicon Valley. What better motivation to innovate and improve than the threat of a new startup stealing some of your business?

Another news story, when combined with these net neutrality rulings, becomes even more concerning: Comcast and Time Warner Cable have just proposed a merger, which would conjoin two of the largest ISPs in the country. Any subscriber to their internet services would be subject to their fast and slow lanes.

Finally, it is likely that prices on internet service would increase with these new rulings. America already has exorbitant costs compared with most other modernized countries. Providing internet access costs approximately $5 a household per month, while costs can range from forty to well over eighty dollars. If these changes take effect, new ISPs promising neutrality will undoubtedly spring up, but they'll be expensive and hard to find. In the end, a majority of Americans will be subject to unequal speeds on the internet, and innovation will suffer as a result. One of the founding principles of the internet was equality. Let's keep it that way.

You can sign a petition asking President Obama to reign in the F.C.C. here.</div>