---
layout: post
title: We Need a New Party
spoiler: Congress is no longer effective. It's no wonder that the institution is sitting at an all-time low approval rating of 7%. Even when there are thousands of children pouring into America from Mexico, Congress doesn't have the political willpower to make common-sense, practical reforms to immigration policy. I won't entirely fault conservatives, although the Tea Party, along with Supreme Court rulings, have completely upset the two-party system, and have made it so that a politician can take extreme views and not risk losing their seat.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">We Need a New Party</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 11, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Congress is no longer effective. It's no wonder that the institution is sitting at an all-time low approval rating of 7%. Even when there are thousands of children pouring into America from Mexico, Congress doesn't have the political willpower to make common-sense, practical reforms to immigration policy. I won't entirely fault conservatives, although the Tea Party, along with Supreme Court rulings, have completely upset the two-party system, and have made it so that a politician can take extreme views and not risk losing their seat.

I propose that we need a new political party. One that is based around bipartisan agreement. Common-sense issues that a majority of the American public can agree on, like legalizing gay marriage, streamlining our immigration policies, domestic infrastructure projects, and reforming our tax code. Admittedly, even for these issues, there's still plenty of disagreement, but there's at least a fair bit of support for legislative change. As public opinion shifts on issues like climate change, energy policy and education, more policies could be taken up under this banner. But for now, any progress is better than none.

I consider myself a strong liberal, fiscally as well as socially. But I'm tired of no compromising in Congress. Although I can agree with policies proposed by politicians far to the left, they will never see any legislative action. As much as I'd love to see Harry Reid or Nancy Pelosi take charge and pass meaningful reform, it won't happen in the near future, and I would rather have a middle of the road compromise than more of this political stalemate. I don't see how anything will break through our current quagmire - Citizens United and gerrymandering has affected Congress too greatly, and with the increasing ability of Americans to isolate themselves from opposing viewpoints, our country isn't going to get less partisan any time soon. As far as I can see, the best hope for change is a party of moderates, working on popular issues, that gets the votes of the moderate Americans and forces the extreme liberals and conservatives to come back to the bargaining table.</div>