---
layout: post
title: Framing Climate Change Correctly
spoiler: On Tuesday, the National Climate Assessment released their quadrennial report. It had similar, if darker tones to the recently released climate report from the United Nations. Scientists linked much of the severe weather that has been plaguing states across the country to climate change, including the West Coast droughts, the scorching heat-waves that have swept the Southwest in recent years, and the floods that have devastated communities around the country. In contrast with the U.N. report, the National Climate Assessment predicted a significantly more dire situation for the world at the end of the century, saying that the sea level could rise as much as six feet, if we don't change our policies on greenhouse gases, compared to the U.N.'s 3.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Framing Climate Change Correctly</p>
    <p class="date-p">May 8, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">On Tuesday, the National Climate Assessment released their quadrennial report. It had similar, if darker tones to the recently released climate report from the United Nations. Scientists linked much of the severe weather that has been plaguing states across the country to climate change, including the West Coast droughts, the scorching heat-waves that have swept the Southwest in recent years, and the floods that have devastated communities around the country. In contrast with the U.N. report, the National Climate Assessment predicted a significantly more dire situation for the world at the end of the century, saying that the sea level could rise as much as six feet, if we don't change our policies on greenhouse gases, compared to the U.N.'s 3.

All in all, the future is bleak. We need immediate action, and we can't tiptoe around the issue. According to Gallup, one in four American citizens is "solidly skeptical" of climate change, and another 36% are in the middle - not yet convinced that climate change is real, and that we need to act on it, but also not skeptical of it. Given that scientists have been aware of human-caused climate change for decades, and have encouraged action for many years and presidencies, we can't still be doubting whether it's a problem at all. No other country is. In Canada, 74% of citizens believe that climate change is a threat. In France, 75%. In Japan, 80%. We can't continue on this path, but President Obama has yet to find a method of convincing the public that climate change is an action-worthy issue. With this report, he took the time to sit down with weather broadcasters and explain the significance of the research. Although maybe this will be the watershed moment for climate change, I highly doubt it.

One problem with reports like the National Climate Assessment is that researchers have to adhere to scientifically rigorous writing techniques. Every claim has to be backed up by data, which seriously reduces how apocalyptic any prediction can be. Cognitive science says that humans have a hard time preparing for the future - it's much easier, and more necessary for survival, to deal with the life-threatening issue that's happening right now, rather than deal with a problem that will likely only affect your children or grandchildren. With this in mind, we need to reimagine how we present data on climate change.

We should talk about the immediate impacts. Research has showed that when discussing the disastrous effects climate change will have down the road, we sometimes make people less likely to act. So focus on the here and now: climate change has been directly linked to weather that has severely affected millions of Americans. It has forced people to move, and it has ruined the livelihoods for entire families. If it's destroyed a business and caused people to lose their jobs, we should report on that. Similarly, if green technology has created new jobs, talk about how good going green is for the economy. Focus on issues that affect Americans now, in their day to day lives. Don't talk about the cataclysmic effects climate change will have decades down the road - you'll only scare people away, or make them skeptical.

Climate change is a massive issue, and scientists are right that it has to be addressed. But we have to inform the public in a smart fashion. We don't want to scare people away from the issue, and we need to stir up grassroots support for a legislative initiative. So let's make it about the here and now, and not about some ethereal future far down the line.</div>