---
layout: post
title: To Live a Meaningful Life
spoiler: As conscious, living organisms, it could be easily argued that the goal of our life is to maximize pleasure. We're highly intelligent organisms, so we can make long-term tradeoffs, like spending four years of our life and a large quantity of money on college, or taking an unfulfilling job in order to make more money down the road. And so, the cycle begins - we spend the first twenty-odd years of our life preparing to enter the workforce, the next thirty to forty years working forty-hour weeks, earning six-digit salaries, and then the last twenty to thirty enjoying the fruits of our riches.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">To Live a Meaningful Life</p>
    <p class="date-p">April 2, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">As conscious, living organisms, it could be easily argued that the goal of our life is to maximize pleasure. We're highly intelligent organisms, so we can make long-term tradeoffs, like spending four years of our life and a large quantity of money on college, or taking an unfulfilling job in order to make more money down the road. And so, the cycle begins - we spend the first twenty-odd years of our life preparing to enter the workforce, the next thirty to forty years working forty-hour weeks, earning six-digit salaries, and then the last twenty to thirty enjoying the fruits of our riches.

We're doing it wrong. We spend fifty or more years of our fairly short lives working primarily for ourselves, only to spend our few remaining years enjoying the wealth we have reaped. Doesn't that sound ridiculous? Instead, think about it this way. We spend the first, say, twenty years of our life learning how to be a functioning member of society. Often, in this period, we are the beneficiaries of tremendous opportunities, such as access to a top-notch education, or wealth inherited from one's forebears. At the end of this period, we're well-educated, intelligent, mature individuals, who have a lot of potential to influence the world. 

Now, some would say that they've worked hard to achieve all this, and that it is an end in and of itself. Any future decision is separate; there are no debts to be payed, or obligations to fulfill. I would argue the opposite. We have been the recipients of tremendous gifts. We are citizens in a free society, so we have no legal obligation to pay those back in any way. In addition, people who live their entire life to benefit themselves often reap huge rewards, such as a stereotypical Wall Street exec. Let me begin my case by arguing that material wealth is not the true source of happiness, as psychologists have suggested for many years.

Earning $100,000 will make you happier than earning $70,000. Seems like a simple, true statement, right? Well, it's wrong. Studies have shown that increases in personal income have diminishing returns, and above a certain point slightly above $70,000, they actually start to have a negative impact. When I heard this result, I was quite surprised. Our society is, in large part, devoted to earning money. But at a certain point, we don't need any more, and it starts to make our life more difficult in other ways.

So if earning fabulous sums of money won't make us happy, what will? Giving that money away. Philanthropy and altruism both result in much more intense, longer periods of happiness. And this isn't just for money. Donating your time, your effort, your concern to a worthwhile person or cause has the same effect. Other sources of happiness? Working a job that has a meaningful impact on the greater world, and fostering close, important personal relationships.

In the end, every human being wants to be remembered once they pass on. When you're lying on your deathbed, do you really think you'll be thinking about your Ferrari, or multi-million dollar mansion? No. You'll likely be thinking about the people you've helped, the meaningful personal connections you've formed, and the effect your life has had on the world. So here's my proposition. We spend our lives working to maximize the collective well-being of society, by working at a meaningful and impactful job, donating our time and money to altruistic causes, and utilizing our time to make the world a better place.

We aren't owed anything by society. Due to good fortune, we have received many benefits - freedom of speech, a democratic society, education, and in many cases, wealth. We shouldn't treat this as a gift. It's a loan, and it's our moral obligation to spend our lives working to pay society back for it. Accepting these loans, and then working the rest of your life only for personal gain, is to renege on that promise. Even if you work in a job that has little impact on the world as a whole, or lack personal relationships, you can still do plenty of good for society. So let's reverse the trend of living for oneself. I think we'll be happier for it.</div>