---
layout: post
title: Don't Forget Silence
spoiler: 
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Don't Forget Silence</p>
    <p class="date-p">September 25, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">A security guard paces through Faunce House, shoulders draped in a neon yellow vest, listening to music as oblivious students pass him by. A couple sits on the Main Green, shrouded by darkness, reveling in their privacy like a child allowed to walk to the bus stop alone for the first time. A single janitor removes massive trash bags from Sayles Hall and brings them to the curb.

During the day, College Hill is a hub of activity. Students are busy walking, studying, learning, listening, thinking, exercising, sleeping, eating, relaxing, writing, computing, crunching, calculating. It's far too easy to simply be swept away by the bustle; too easy to never notice the fresh fall air, bursting in your mouth like a taste of the finest cider; too easy to ignore the world outside of campus, which struggles from troubles far larger than being late for a calculus exam, simply because you didn't wake to the alarm on your old iPhone. If only you had the newest version.

At night, the campus changes. What was simply a mass of bodies evaporates to reveal flawless lawn, a night sky glowing with streetlights, and silence.

In August, before I arrived in Providence, I thought the idea of being awake and outside after midnight patently ridiculous. Having grown up on a road where my nearest neighbor was out of sight from my front door, I never thought that I might have to hunt for solitude.

I have now been a Brunonian for a month. It is far too easy to surrender to the glow of artificial light, the technology, and the well-stocked dining halls that stay open until two in the morning. Even now, I'm sitting in a dorm lounge with my laptop, headphones blocking out external noise, phone at my side. My classes require this -- I have thirty or more hours of homework every week. But in that rare free moment when I can slow down and just notice; that is a vital moment, a moment for thinking of and appreciating something more than the drudgery -- the world we are surrounded by.</div>