---
layout: post
title: Israel's Quagmire
spoiler: Israel and Palestine are at it again. After months of missile strikes, the deaths of three Israeli and one Palestinian teenager at the start of the month finally pushed Israel past the breaking point. On July 8th, they engaged in a major military assault on the Gaza Strip, with the goal of routing the terrorist organization Hamas. So far, over two hundred Palestinians have been killed, with only one casualty for Israel, and the violence shows no sign of ending.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Israel's Quagmire</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 17, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Israel and Palestine are at it again. After months of missile strikes, the deaths of three Israeli and one Palestinian teenager at the start of the month finally pushed Israel past the breaking point. On July 8th, they engaged in a major military assault on the Gaza Strip, with the goal of routing the terrorist organization Hamas. So far, over two hundred Palestinians have been killed, with only one casualty for Israel, and the violence shows no sign of ending.

Earlier this week, a ceasefire agreement proposed by Egypt was accepted by Israel, but declined by Hamas. Israel agreed to a five-hour United Nations ceasefire earlier today, but offered a stern warning to Hamas that if they used the window to launch any assaults, the Israeli military would respond swiftly and decisively. According to the New York Times, a senior military official for Israel said that an Israeli ground invasion of Gaza is very likely. Even though Israel is employing fairly modern standards of warfare, nobody, not even Israelis, want the warfare to continue.

But there is no real end in sight. Hamas, although technically the elected government of Palestine, has no concern for the general population of Palestinians. Various government officials have stated that Israel's goal is to eradicate Hamas, while inflicting as few civilian casualties as possible. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been fairly silent on a military incursion, but other officials that are known as mouthpieces for Netanyahu have strongly advocated action.

Nevertheless, even if Israel were to invade the Gaza Strip, it would be highly unlikely to end the series of military conflicts that have been going on for over a decade now. Permanent occupation isn't really a globally viable option, and without it, Hamas will only spring back to continue their mission, much like Al Qaeda and its affiliates have weathered America's assault. Only now are we seeing that the only effective way of keeping Al Qaeda suppressed is to target people high up in the organization with drones and missiles, suggesting that Israel should use the same methods to keep Hamas under control.

Part of the problem is that a majority of the Palestinian populace hasn't yet decided to push for a ceasefire and long-term, sustainable agreement. Until there is a broad, bipartisan agreement across both countries to eliminate Hamas, it is unlikely the conflict will ever end, no matter what Israel does with sanctions, occupations, or border control.

John Kerry, and other diplomats, haven't yet given up on a two-state solution, but Israel and Palestine have. Part of the reason Kerry hasn't proposed anything reasonable is that he hasn't embraced the root of the conflict, which is religion. While it's unfair to say that the Palestinian people's national identity was created entirely as a response to Zionism, it certainly was part of the reason. Although Netanyahu and other Israeli politicians may not bring up religious reasons for the conflict, and they may not even use them to justify their own thinking, much of the Israeli public still views Palestine as holy land that should be rightfully theirs. Hamas doesn't hold back on religion - every public announcement they make includes plenty of references to the Muslim religion. John Kerry and the United Nations, by ignoring religion when proposing solutions, aren't even offering reasonable resolutions.

We need a new paradigm in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, or else it will continue into the foreseeable future in its current state, one of constant war. We need a new approach to diplomacy, one that considers the religious basis of the conflict, and one that seeks to ease hostility in the Israeli and Palestinian communities. Until we enter this new age of discussion, there can be no end to the crisis, and Israel won't find the peace it is looking for.</div>