---
layout: post
title: Thursday, July 17th
spoiler: From time to time, an act of violence so senseless occurs, the world is put on its heels. On Thursday, Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down by Ukrainian separatists using a surface-to-air missile. 298 people were killed. We have continually underestimated the potential of the Ukrainian crisis, and now almost three hundred people are dead because of our miscalculations. It's time for a global response, focusing on reunifying Ukraine, and putting the final nail in the coffin that is Russia's economy.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Thursday, July 17th</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 19, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">From time to time, an act of violence so senseless occurs, the world is put on its heels. On Thursday, Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down by Ukrainian separatists using a surface-to-air missile. 298 people were killed. We have continually underestimated the potential of the Ukrainian crisis, and now almost three hundred people are dead because of our miscalculations. It's time for a global response, focusing on reunifying Ukraine, and putting the final nail in the coffin that is Russia's economy.

First, some background. On Thursday, at 6:15, the flight departed from Amsterdam en route to Kuala Lumpur. At 10:15, Ukrainian aviation officials informed Malaysian officials that they had lost contact with the flight, right as it was passing over eastern Ukraine. Rebel fighters were the first on the scene, and have repeatedly fluctuated between allowing access to third-party rescue personnel and observers, and denying them entrance to certain areas of the crash site. So far, it has been confirmed that the aircraft was shot down by a surface-to-air missile launched from an area controlled by Russian-backed separatists, and it appears likely that a Russian-made Buk SA-11 missile system was utilized to destroy the plane.

Given the advanced nature of the SA-11, it seems unlikely for the missile to have been launched by an untrained Ukrainian separatist, and more likely for it to have been controlled by either a Russian, or by a Russian-trained Ukrainian. In President Obama's address on the matter yesterday, he did not directly point a finger at Russian President Vladimir Putin, but he did say that Russia is responsible for not deescalating the crisis in eastern Ukraine, which has led, indirectly, to the destruction of the plane.

Of the 298 passengers and crew members, 189 were Dutch. To put that in perspective, that is a larger percentage of the Dutch population than the percentage of the American population that died on 9/11. Also included in the casualties were 44 Malaysians, 28 Australians, 12 Indonesians, 9 Britons, 4 Germans, 4 Belgians, 3 Filipinos, an American, a Canadian, a New Zealander, and a Chinese. One passenger remains yet to be identified. Perhaps more importantly, many of the passengers were HIV/AIDS researchers traveling to AIDS 2014, an international conference on the disease. One leading researcher, Dr. Joep Lange, and his longtime partner were also killed.

Now, the question is, where do we go from here? Questions are currently being raised about whether the missile was shot from territory controlled by Ukrainian separatists, or from Russia. Even if the missile were to have been shot by a well-trained Ukrainian, the ground is still set for an international boycott of Russia. EU sanctions have had a minimal effect on Russia up until now, primarily because many countries have been unwilling to cut trade ties. But the death of your own citizens, brutally shot out of the sky for no logical reason? If that's not an event that will tip the scales, nothing will.

Moreover, there is some evidence to show that Ukrainian separatists are actively trying to conceal some parts of the crash in order to deny Russian involvement. Ukrainian officials say they have photographs from after the crash showing three Russian missile launchers being transported out of Ukraine and back into Russian territory. Should these photographs be vetted, it directly places the blame on both the separatists and on Russia.

Nobody will go to war over this, but if countries such as Germany and the Netherlands were to stop buying natural gas from Russia, it has the potential to sink their economy into a deep depression. Should that happen, both the general populace of Russia and the oligarchs will be justified in demanding the resignation of Vladimir Putin.

A horrible accident of this magnitude cannot go without retribution. It is time for the violence in Ukraine to end, and for Russia's influence in the event to be uncovered, and for the price to be paid for the wrongful escalation of the crisis in Ukraine.

 

In other news from Thursday, Israel, as expected, began a ground invasion of Gaza. So far, no major progress has been made - a number of underground tunnels have been destroyed with a minimal number of civilian casualties. International pushback against the invasion has been small. In President Obama's address yesterday, he said that Israel was justified in defending itself from the constant missile bombardment from Hamas. He also expressed hope that the number of casualties would remain low.

As I stated earlier this week, I highly doubt that the invasion will have any lasting effect. Although Hamas may suffer a setback, the only way to deal lasting damage to them is to remove their regional support, which is primarily from Iran at this point. Otherwise, they will continue to rise up in small numbers and cause havoc in Israel.

 

Lastly, the immigration crisis down South is only getting worse. President Obama continues to call for a major influx of money to help address the flood of immigrants, and Republicans continue to be divided on the need for reform. Many Tea Party conservatives support mass deportation - a strategy unlikely to work, and moreover, not a humanitarian solution. Some conservatives support immigration reform, with some leniency for child immigrants.

In the end, these are kids crossing over the border. Innocent kids, fleeing their homes, searching for a better life. While I won't say that reform isn't necessary, deporting them is an inhuman and unnecessary solution. As per usual in Washington, progress is slow, and many are doubtful as to whether any meaningful changes will be put in place before Congress goes on recess in a couple weeks. I guess time will show whether we have any ability to address national issues, or whether we are truly, entirely, broken as a legislative system.</div>