---
layout: post
title: Do We Need Masculism?
spoiler: Gender in America is in an interesting place at the moment. While women are certainly still discriminated against in the workplace, in education, and in general society both blatantly and insidiously, they're quickly overtaking men and boys in many metrics. In kindergarten, there is a larger gap in social and behavioral skills between girls and boys than between black and white students, with boys getting the short end of the stick. A majority of American college graduates are women. Men's wages are stagnating, while women's wages are quickly catching up.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Do We Need Masculism?</p>
    <p class="date-p">April 30, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Gender in America is in an interesting place at the moment. While women are certainly still discriminated against in the workplace, in education, and in general society both blatantly and insidiously, they're quickly overtaking men and boys in many metrics. In kindergarten, there is a larger gap in social and behavioral skills between girls and boys than between black and white students, with boys getting the short end of the stick. A majority of American college graduates are women. Men's wages are stagnating, while women's wages are quickly catching up.

Men certainly have a professional edge, which begins once they have entered the workplace. Many companies feel more comfortable promoting men than women. When a professional searches for a mentor or sponsor, they're likely to find someone of the same gender, which, in a world where most executives are men, strongly benefits men coming up through the ranks. A professional who chooses to go part time suffers financial and career disadvantages, and these people are primarily women.

Yesterday, an article on The Upshot discussed boy's failure in elementary and secondary education. Some possible causes they proposed: an increase in single-parent households, a lack of male teachers in elementary and pre-elementary school, and classroom setups that work against some learning styles. Claudia Buchmann, a professor at Ohio State, suggests that,

"Boys are getting the wrong message about what you need to do to be successful. Traditional gender roles are misguiding boys. In today’s economy, being tough and being strong are not what leads to success.”

No matter what the cause is, males are losing some of their status in society. Many men are unemployed, and not actively searching for work. It's a problem we need to solve.

In essence, gender in America is a dichotomy. Today, men do poorly as students, whether in elementary, secondary or college, but any guy that makes it through has better career opportunities and more chances to advance. Women, on the other hand, are dominant in education, but suffer in the workplace. I strongly believe in the feminist movement - I'm reading Sheryl Sandberg's Lean In currently - but it's worth remembering that there are two sexes, and guys may not be as secure as we once thought them to be.</div>