---
layout: post
title: The Heartburn Effect
spoiler: A flurry of paper. Silence, while everyone reads the first question. Scratches of pencil on paper begin as we hunch over our desks, scrambling to solve the three problems written in front of us. Numbers, equations, and formulae fill pages of scrap paper, scrambled into a barely legible heap. No talking is allowed, but the room is far from quiet: The coughing of the proctor, seated at the teacher’s desk in the corner, echoes through the classroom. The clock on the wall ticking, reminding us that while each minute may feel infinite, the 720 seconds won’t last forever. Footsteps in the hallway as students walk by, hands full with sets of problems ready to be graded. This is a math meet, and this is what all competition mathematicians — mathletes, for short — live for.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">The Heartburn Effect</p>
    <p class="date-p">November 6, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">“You have twelve minutes. You may begin.”

A flurry of paper. Silence, while everyone reads the first question. Scratches of pencil on paper begin as we hunch over our desks, scrambling to solve the three problems written in front of us. Numbers, equations, and formulae fill pages of scrap paper, scrambled into a barely legible heap. No talking is allowed, but the room is far from quiet: The coughing of the proctor, seated at the teacher’s desk in the corner, echoes through the classroom. The clock on the wall ticking, reminding us that while each minute may feel infinite, the 720 seconds won’t last forever. Footsteps in the hallway as students walk by, hands full with sets of problems ready to be graded. This is a math meet, and this is what all competition mathematicians — mathletes, for short — live for.

In the summer of 2009, I found myself walking over scratched tiles patterning a dimly lit hallway in Oxford Hills Comprehensive High School. I was exiting the school library, a misbegotten room, having finished a day of teaching at a summer program with my father.

“Ready to go?” I said to him, turning toward the doors that led out of the school. Just as we were about to step out, the childish tones of Cyndy, the coordinator of the program, rang out behind us. “Mike! Ben! You have to meet Mr. Gerry,” she said.

My first look at Allen Gerry was not endearing. A tall, thin sixty-something, his suit pocket carried a selection of pens, pencils and erasers encased in a pocket protector. His head was mostly bald, and the small amount of hair that remained was white and wispy. “Mr. Gerry is the coach for the math team here,” Cyndy said, smiling as her gray, waist-length pigtails bobbed behind her.

I have lost the exact details of our first conversation with time, suffice to say that it was generic; Mr. Gerry asked my father and me about math classes, homeschooling, and what we were teaching at the summer program. As our formalities ran out, the conversation took a turn. Perhaps seeing some spark, he extended the offer to attend the first math team meeting of the year a month from then. He also produced a set of practice questions from his folder, and said I could take a look at them and see if I was interested.

Driving home, I was skeptical about joining the team. I hemmed and hawed, and came up with excuses about not wanting to be the youngest person there. At the time, my father nodded along, and let the topic drop.

That evening, my parents made an executive decision: I would go to the first meeting of math team in September, whether I wanted to or not.

Five weeks later, I walked through the green double-doors of Oxford Hills Comprehensive High School alone, down the same long hallway lined with scuffed-up black and white tiles. I passed countless displays of dusty trophies and plaques covered with names only remembered by the files in the registrar’s office. Sterile fluorescent lights hummed overhead, and ancient, mauve lockers lined the walls. On the right, a yellowed pine door loomed — B266.

Like the stereotypical classroom, B266 had cinderblock walls painted a stark white, and it was filled with tan desk-chair units. A wooden desk took up the front of the room, filled with interleaved papers, neatly aligned rulers and pens and an old laptop. A shiny whiteboard hung on the wall behind. Mr. Gerry sat at the desk, scribbling slanted cursive on papers. As I closed the door with a gentle click, he looked up, and grinned a toothy, gap-filled smile.

“Hi Ben!”

“Hello Mr. Gerry,” I said. “How are you?”

“I’m good,” he said. “Did you bring the problem set with you?”

“I did — here it is.”

With that, he joined me at a desk with a sheaf of scrap paper and his mechanical pencil. Enthusiasm radiated from him.

“Let’s take a look.”

Mr. Gerry dove into every problem we worked on, even if he had already done it twenty times over. If my approach were incorrect, he would take the time to figure out how to fix it, rather than just show me his method. When my father arrived to pick me up, my head was overflowing with numbers and equations, and I could not wait for the next practice.

A few days later, I sat down for dinner after practice with my parents. We were at Yianni’s House of Pizza — a local small-town pizza joint you might see in a strip mall, with one exception: The food was good. We took a booth next to a window overlooking the neighboring Burger King and waited for our number to be called. Soon, the topic of conversation turned to math team, and I, eager to demonstrate my newfound knowledge, pulled a crinkled problem set and sheaf of scrap paper out of my bag.

“See, you start with a matrix, which is this group of numbers here, and first, you pick a row of numbers,” I said, scribbling out lines of numbers in my awkward script — halfway in between cursive and lettering.

“Next, you… Hmm.” I bumbled for a bit, before giving up and saying, “Well, it’s something like that.”

My parents, neither of whom were the slightest bit interested in math, took it in stride and my father said something like, “Sounds like you’re having a lot of fun.”

Truth be told, I was. I had always thought of math as drudgery, work to get through before I had my father’s permission to move on to computer programming — my real love. But math team had changed that. After just a few practices, I now looked forward to practice every Tuesday and Thursday, and Mr. Gerry moved from being a geeky stranger to a mentor.

A few weeks later, the first math meet arrived. On a Wednesday afternoon, ten of us piled onto a school bus and set off for Hebron Academy, a nearby private school. Standing outside the massive gym, Mr. Gerry gave us his standard pep talk — have fun, get the first question right before you move on, and don’t leave any answers blank. I was quite nervous, and it didn’t help that I was surrounded by hundreds of other students, all of whom I figured were mathematical geniuses.

That meet was the first of many. I scored a 24 out of 60. Not impressive for a senior in high school, but for an eleven-year-old, it was far beyond what Mr. Gerry or I expected. At the end of the day, when my parents picked me up from the bus stop, he came over and said to us, “Ben did very well today. I hope you choose to continue with math team. It’s been a real pleasure working with Ben, and I think there is a lot of potential for the future.” I, too, had great hopes for the future, and for math team.

At the time, math team was my only experience with a standard classroom setting, and so I presumed that Mr. Gerry was representative of math teachers everywhere. Having had a good number of teachers since then — some good, many bad — I have learned the truth in what John Steinbeck once said:

“I have come to believe that a great teacher is a great artist and that there are as few as there are any other great artists. Teaching might even be the greatest of the arts since the medium is the human mind and spirit.”

Mr. Gerry was a great artist, painting numbers and symbols into my mind. But he was not just a teacher — he was a mentor. Although I came to practice to learn math, some of the best days were those when I spent the whole time talking to Mr. Gerry, which happened with increasing frequency as the years passed.

At first, our conversations were about math team, classes, homeschooling — standard student-teacher topics. When I took college courses, he helped me prepare for tests, and offered suggestions on tricky problems:

“I got my Real Analysis midterm today, Mr. Gerry,” I said, sitting at a desk-chairs in B266.

“Oh?” Mr. Gerry said, looking up from the papers he was grading.

“Yeah, it’s five proofs.”

“Do you have it with you? I’d love to see it.”

From there, we would work together at the whiteboard, scribbling out possible avenues of approach. He would never guide me to the answer, instead proposing a new point of view, and letting me scribble through the solution.

As our relationship matured, we moved into discussing family life, politics, religion, and work. When the Arab Spring burst into life, I remember a snippet of conversation:

“Do you think we should get involved in Libya?” I said.

“I don’t think so. We’re in a lot of debt from domestic issues, and we can’t afford to be a policeman for the world,” Mr. Gerry said.

“But we have a lot of interests in the area.”

“You mean oil?”

We didn’t always agree, but we always learned from each other.

In the spring of last year, I was waiting for my final reply from colleges. I had been declined from all of my choices other than Brown, and I had been put on the wait list there. Mr. Gerry’s comment about the other colleges? “What a mistake. They lost the chance to have a great student.”

Later, after I had heard back from Brown, at a team dinner after a national math competition, Mr. Gerry stood to give his typical remarks, and said, “I wouldn’t be on this trip without Ben. He was just accepted to Brown University and chose to take a gap year. I’m happy that he was accepted, but I’m even happier that I will have another year to work with him.” Turning to me, he finished, “Thank you for all the happiness you’ve brought to me.” Unbeknownst to him, one of the primary reasons I was looking forward to my gap year was spending more time in B266.

In June, I attended my final math competition as Mr. Gerry’s student. When I left my last practice, the fate of the team was uncertain. For thirty-nine years, Mr. Gerry coached a full complement of students, leading Oxford Hills to a first place state title for over a decade straight. But the last time that we had ten committed participants was my first year on the team. Since then, our numbers have dwindled to the point where we bring five or six students to a meet instead of the ideal ten. And for four years, I was the only person who showed up for every practice and went to every meet. He had always had at least one student who realized the value in the team, and put in the time to excel. With me leaving for college, there was nobody to fill my shoes.

This spring, as my final practice neared, my father asked, “How are you going to thank Mr. Gerry when you leave?” After some discussion, he said, “Why not see if you can find past team members, and have a celebration for Mr. Gerry?”

Fast forward two months. On Saturday, June 14th, I found myself in the Fireside Room of the Foreside Tavern, surrounded by thirty-something math team alumni, ranging from the recently graduated to the middle-aged.

“He’s here,” my father said, poking his head through the sliding wooden panel that acted as the door for the room. Everyone else packed into a corner of the room, and I ventured into the restaurant, looking for his familiar face.

“Mr. Gerry!” I said, welcoming him with a handshake. Some of his family trailed behind him — his wife Diane, and their daughter Robin and her husband John, who were visiting for the week from New York City.

“Hi Ben,” Mr. Gerry said, his toothy grin filling his face. “How are you?” (Mr. Gerry always addresses me this way. He always sounds awkward when greeting me: Overeager, but trying to correct for it.)

“I’m good,” I said. “We’re in through here.” I slid the door open, and led them in.

“Surprise!” The room erupted in cheers.

The whole evening passed in a blur of activity. For the first ten or fifteen minutes, Mr. Gerry was shell-shocked by the number of past students, current colleagues, and, in the case of my parents, devoted fans who had come to thank him for his work. It was not a retirement party, but it was a capstone moment for his career as a math team coach.

In addition to mingling, the evening also included two special events: A 20 question “Super Team Round,” I had created, in which Mr. Gerry and his friend and rival Pete Pedersen drafted two teams of twelve and went head to head; and a twenty-minute long video of messages to Mr. Gerry, some from people at the dinner and some from those who had been unable to make it. Transcribing the video would be a book unto itself, but here are a few of the more memorable statements:

“Over three years, Mr. Gerry led me to believe in the power of owning math, of not just accomplishing it, but understanding it and allowing it to be meaningful.”
- Jeremy Read, Junior at Middlebury

“I would not be where I am today without the math team.”
- David Morin, Professor at Harvard

“Allen Gerry, you’re my inspiration.”
- Pete Pedersen, Head Coach for the Maine All-Star Team

“You’re the reason anyone did well in math. I’d like to say thank you, not just for me, but for all the students you’ve had in math.”
- Zane Duffany, Senior at University of Maine

“I know that without you, I would be nowhere near where I am today. Thank you for being an excellent mentor, a great friend, and an outstanding teacher.”
- Ben Murphy

My final surprise was the arrival of Neil Tame, the original head coach for the team, and a mentor to Mr. Gerry, much as Mr. Gerry was to me. For many of the alum there, he had been their Algebra 2, Precalculus, or Problem Solving teacher, so everyone was quite awestruck when he, now eighty-something years old, entered the room. Although he might not have had the same appearance, he was still the same coach everyone loved.

I’ve seen Mr. Gerry twice since that night, which he called, “the best night of his mathematical career.” Both times were for no more than an hour. Today, as a student at Brown, I send out an email every few weeks about my life. I address it to six people: My parents, my two grandmothers, a friend, and Mr. Gerry. Whenever I walk into my math classroom in Kassar House, I always wish he were sitting there.

I’ve only received a few short emails from him, but I can still hear his quiet voice, explaining the solution to a trigonometry proof, or wincing and saying “heartburn” when I make a mistake on a problem. Last year, he moved from full-time to part-time, yet he still works as much, if not more, than any other teacher in the school. His students, me included, will never forget the impact he had on them. His days are far from over.

Earlier this evening, I wondered out loud, “How did Oxford Hills do in the first meet?” I checked the website for the Maine Association of Math League, and looked at scores from the division that Oxford Hills competes in, Pi-Cone North. Sure enough, in 7th place, Oxford Hills.</div>