---
layout: post
title: Hobby Lobby and the Common Core
spoiler: Earlier today, the Supreme Court made yet another activist decision in Hobby Lobby v. Burwell. In essence, the case challenged the right of the Department of Health and Human Services to mandate that a corporation pay for contraceptives for employees. Hobby Lobby is a religious business, and based their argument on the fact that they should have religious freedom, much like an individual does. In a partisan 5-4 decision, the court ruled with Hobby Lobby, with Justice Samuel Alito writing the majority opinion. You can read the decision here, along with the New York Times's coverage here. In essence, the decision was predicated upon the "religious liberty" of a closely-held corporation, a corporation owned by a single family, and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. 
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Hobby Lobby and the Common Core</p>
    <p class="date-p">July 1, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Earlier today, the Supreme Court made yet another activist decision in Hobby Lobby v. Burwell. In essence, the case challenged the right of the Department of Health and Human Services to mandate that a corporation pay for contraceptives for employees. Hobby Lobby is a religious business, and based their argument on the fact that they should have religious freedom, much like an individual does. In a partisan 5-4 decision, the court ruled with Hobby Lobby, with Justice Samuel Alito writing the majority opinion. You can read the decision here, along with the New York Times's coverage here. In essence, the decision was predicated upon the "religious liberty" of a closely-held corporation, a corporation owned by a single family, and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. 

My opinion on requiring corporations to pay for contraception is mixed - on one hand, contraceptives should be paid for by the government, insurance companies or the corporations. Of those three, the government option would seem to be the most reasonable. Going through Congress to force insurance companies to pay for it would require an immense legislative push on both sides of the aisle, not to mention overriding the immense amount of lobbying money. While I can see the corporation option being possible in the future, in the current pro-business environment, I don't think it's a viable option.

My opposition to the ruling is more on the grounds of what it signifies - a push to give corporations all the rights of people that will be undoubtedly detrimental to the country as a whole. It began with Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission back in 2010, where the court ruled that a corporation has the same free speech rights as a human being, and Justice Alito famously claimed that a corporation can, and should be regarded as a person. I think time has shown that Citizens United has changed politics in this country immeasurably for the worse. It continued here, with the Court granting corporations religious liberties. Unlike Citizens United, this decision has major ramifications in the future cases it will inspire. Contraceptives is fairly small in the big scheme of things, but other corporations can use this "religious liberty" to justify all sorts of rules for their employees, and the court will have a hard time making a distinction between worthy and unworthy ones.

In the end, this decision will likely have major impacts going forward, while Citizens United had immediate implications, but few future ones.

In other news, the Times posted this article about Common Core math. What Indiana, South Carolina and Oklahoma have done, and what Louisiana is trying to do in repealing the Common Core standards is ridiculous, and even un-American. For many years, we've been crushed in international rankings in math and science. Many of the countries that have repeatedly beaten us take a totally different approach to mathematical education; one that is reflected in part in the Common Core standards. All the Common Core does is establish basic proficiency thresholds and give general guidelines as to how to teach to meet them - the Common Core isn't the cause of our academic failures. By admitting defeat and trying to repeal the Common Core and go back to our old, sub-standard education methods, we're saying that other countries are better than us at education, and that we cannot improve and work harder, like we have done before. Shameful. Like Obamacare, the Common Core hasn't been rolled out perfectly, but the idea is needed. We just have to stick it out and work with our teachers to fix the system.</div>