---
layout: post
title: Parenting Isn't Natural
spoiler: In political rhetoric today, very little is sacred. One protected topic, however, is parenting. Suggesting that the average American parent is making a mistake in how they raise their kid is close to political suicide. "A parent knows what is best for their kid," the argument goes. I would argue the contrary.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Parenting Isn't Natural</p>
    <p class="date-p">March 28, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">In political rhetoric today, very little is sacred. One protected topic, however, is parenting. Suggesting that the average American parent is making a mistake in how they raise their kid is close to political suicide. "A parent knows what is best for their kid," the argument goes. I would argue the contrary. Here are a few examples:

- Refusing to vaccinate your child
- Refusing medical treatment for your child for religious reasons
- Not talking intelligently to your child in very early childhood
- Child abuse, whether physically or mentally
- Not enrolling your children in Head Start or preschool

I'm not saying that you're a terrible parent if you take part in one of the above behaviors. Instead, I'm suggesting that parenting a child is a tricky job in this modern world, and without a significant investment of time and effort, nobody is prepared for it. Let's use the third point as an example. Recent studies have shown that the number of spoken words a child has heard in their early childhood strongly correlates to standards of success later in life, such as SAT scores. By age three, a child with parents who are professionals will have heard, on average, 35 million words. In contrast, a child with parents who are on welfare will have heard only 10 million.

We need to make sure that parents in this country are well-informed about what's necessary to raise a successful child. Too often, a child is set on a bad path in very early childhood, with repercussions that echo through the rest of their lives.</div>