---
layout: post
title: Curiosity vs. Competence
spoiler: Intellectual curiosity is an oft admired trait. Countless biographies of figures like Richard Feynman, Oliver Sacks and Steve Jobs describe a sense of wonder with the world; a fascination with any topic placed in front of them. At the same time, it's often overlooked, and I'm sure many would consider it to be an attribute unnecessary to success. However, many paradigm-changing discoveries came about because the inventor was involved in the world outside of their field, and pulled together disparate pieces of knowledge to formulate a new, whole idea.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Curiosity vs. Competence</p>
    <p class="date-p">February 28, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Intellectual curiosity is an oft admired trait. Countless biographies of figures like Richard Feynman, Oliver Sacks and Steve Jobs describe a sense of wonder with the world; a fascination with any topic placed in front of them. At the same time, it's often overlooked, and I'm sure many would consider it to be an attribute unnecessary to success. However, many paradigm-changing discoveries came about because the inventor was involved in the world outside of their field, and pulled together disparate pieces of knowledge to formulate a new, whole idea.

I would argue that intellectual curiosity is a personal attribute that will soon be necessary for success. In an article in last Sunday's New York Times, Thomas Friedman discusses how to get a job at Google with Laszlo Bock, the senior vice president of people operations at the company. Although the article is certainly worth reading, I wanted to look at one quote in specific:

“If you take somebody who has high cognitive ability, is innately curious, willing to learn and has emergent leadership skills, and you hire them as an H.R. person or finance person, and they have no content knowledge, and you compare them with someone who’s been doing just one thing and is a world expert, the expert will go: ‘I’ve seen this 100 times before; here’s what you do.’ ” Most of the time the nonexpert will come up with the same answer, added Bock, “because most of the time it’s not that hard.”
High cognitive ability and leadership skills have been prized attributes in the job market since the dawn of time. I would argue the other two attributes that Bock mentions, innate curiosity and a willingness to learn, are inherently tied to one another. If a potential employee is intellectually curious, then an interest in learning must follow. On the other hand, if an employee is willing to learn but not curious, then they have no personal motivation to exercise that specific talent. While there are certainly corner cases, I think that curiosity often implies an openness to learning, and vice versa.

Now, my question is, how do we instill this curiosity in children? Our public education system is designed to instill competence, not curiosity. Students learn how to solve a linear equation, or how to calculate gravitational forces, or what event started World War I, but they are rarely encouraged to explore a topic on their own. For decades, there was little need of curiosity to be successful, and our education system has many holdovers from this time. But now, with a changing economy and increasingly competitive job market, career-level work requires not just a college degree and proof of competency, but a desire to learn, innovate, and explore.

Our focus on testing in education fundamentally opposes curiosity. Whether it's a state-administered exam, a year-end review or the SAT, doing well on an examination requires two skills: A good memory, and knowledge of how to play to the rules of the test. Note that this isn't an argument against education benchmarks like the Common Core. As much as I wish every school could be trusted to teach a proper, rigorous curriculum, it would be foolish to presume as much. However, we have to find a happy medium between our test-driven, competency-only approach to education, and a hands-on, project-based approach that encourages exploration and curiosity, not just in elementary school, but all the way until graduation.

Once you enter college, the playing field changes. In high school, creative opportunities are few and far between, and are often heavily regulated. But in many colleges and universities, they are abundant. Whether through student groups, research projects or internships, every student has the ability to go far beyond their classes and explore new topics and activities. However, if a student's sense of intellectual curiosity has been drilled out of them by public education, is there really much of a chance they will utilize these ample possibilities? I doubt it. This is tragic both for the students, who miss out on experiences that could greatly improve their learning, and for the school, who loses out on students involved in interesting outside work.

In today's job market and education system, the dichotomy between curiosity and competence couldn't be more pronounced. As we move from a skill-based economy to an economy where an openness to learning and a desire to explore are critical, our education system is becoming increasingly outdated to the point where it no longer adequately prepares students for the real world. We need to revise our approach, and soon. Our children are losing out.</div>