---
layout: post
title: Sexiness in Silicon Valley
spoiler: Last week, Yiren Lu, a graduate student in computer science at Columbia, wrote a fantastic article for the New York Times magazine. Entitled Silicon Valley's Youth Problem, Lu offers up a strong case for ageism in Silicon Valley. He argues that fresh computer science graduates from top universities are the employee of choice for top companies in the Valley, but the graduates aren't distributing themselves equally. "Hot" companies like Facebook or Google, or fresh, promising startup companies are bringing in the new talent, while industry titans that lack the "sexiness", like Cisco or Microsoft, are losing out.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Sexiness in Silicon Valley</p>
    <p class="date-p">March 18, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Last week, Yiren Lu, a graduate student in computer science at Columbia, wrote a fantastic article for the New York Times magazine. Entitled Silicon Valley's Youth Problem, Lu offers up a strong case for ageism in Silicon Valley. He argues that fresh computer science graduates from top universities are the employee of choice for top companies in the Valley, but the graduates aren't distributing themselves equally. "Hot" companies like Facebook or Google, or fresh, promising startup companies are bringing in the new talent, while industry titans that lack the "sexiness", like Cisco or Microsoft, are losing out.

Engineers and developers who aren't fresh out of school, who have worked in the tech industry for many years, are not in high demand like these fresh graduates. Often, they trade off knowledge of cutting-edge technology for experience and real-life knowledge, which companies value less. In addition, this older vanguard may not fit in with the new recruits socially; after all, once you're past thirty, doing bar crawls over the weekend loses some appeal.

Lu concludes that although these older titans may not be as attractive an employer, they're still absolutely vital to the technology world. Cisco makes a large portion of the routers in the world; without those, how could anyone access the new web application, or order the next gadget? And Microsoft makes the world's most ubiquitous operating system. Without them, far fewer consumers would have access to a computer.

One point that Lu didn't mention in his article is that there's a major shortage of computer science graduates. Unlike many other sectors of the economy, graduates in tech and engineering are quickly snapped up. The average starting salary for a computer scientist is on the order of eighty to ninety thousand dollars, and the number of available jobs is only increasing.

With this kind of demand, companies that can't afford to offer large paychecks or attractive stock options won't even have a shot at snagging this talent. Nor can I see any easy solution. It's highly unlikely that salaries for computer science graduates will decrease, and it's also infeasible for some companies to remodel themselves with a volleyball court and fully catered lunches like Google or Facebook.

In fact, the only solution I can see is to increase the number of computer science graduates, a task easier said than done. If we want to ensure that every company in Silicon Valley has fair access to talent, there has to be a much larger talent pool. We could start teaching computer science in grade school, or publicize the career opportunities in the tech world. One thing is for certain: We can't let this supply-demand gap grow any larger, because it will start to hurt the rate of innovation in the Valley, which has far reaching implications for our economy.</div>