---
layout: post
title: Give the Kids Some Freedom
spoiler: When was the last time you heard of a seven-year-old using a scroll saw unsupervised, or chopping down saplings in the forest, or clambering over rocks and through rivers without a parent in sight? It's probably been a while. You might consider these reckless activities, the result of a negligent parent. However, a few decades, all this was commonplace. Maybe those activities are a little extreme, so take some more mundane ones, such as playing ball in the street, or hanging out with all the neighborhood kids on the corner. Both are very uncommon today, but most adults in a previous generation will recall similar experiences in their childhood.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Give the Kids Some Freedom</p>
    <p class="date-p">March 20, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">When was the last time you heard of a seven-year-old using a scroll saw unsupervised, or chopping down saplings in the forest, or clambering over rocks and through rivers without a parent in sight? It's probably been a while. You might consider these reckless activities, the result of a negligent parent. However, a few decades, all this was commonplace. Maybe those activities are a little extreme, so take some more mundane ones, such as playing ball in the street, or hanging out with all the neighborhood kids on the corner. Both are very uncommon today, but most adults in a previous generation will recall similar experiences in their childhood.

"Well, that's a good thing," you might argue. "Kids are safer now, less likely to get injured." Hanna Rosin of The Atlantic wouldn't agree. In her recent cover article, "The Overprotected Kid", she argues that parents should allow their kids to take risks as part of early childhood development. Being too protective will likely lead to a host of phobias down the road, Rosin claims, citing several psychological studies. Here's an excerpt from the article:

Children are born with the instinct to take risks in play, because historically, learning to negotiate risk has been crucial to survival; in another era, they would have had to learn to run from some danger, defend themselves from others, be independent. Even today, growing up ins a process of managing fears and learning to arrive at sound decisions. By engaging in risky play, children are effectively subjecting themselves to a form of exposure therapy, in which they force themselves to do the thing they're afraid of in order to overcome their fear. But if they never go through that process, the fear can turn into a phobia. Paradoxically, Sandseter (a professor of early-childhood education) writes, "our fear of children being harmed," mostly in minor ways, "may result in more fearful children and increased levels of psychopathology." She cites a study showing that children who injured themselves falling from heights when they were between 5 and 9 years old are less likely to be afraid of heights at age 18. "Risky play with great heights will provide a desensitizing or habituating experience," she writes.

My own childhood has had some of these risk-taking experiences. I grew up on a dirt road in rural Maine, surrounded by many acres of woods. I was technically homeschooled at the time, but my father took that more as a license to explore. He showed me how to use power tools, then left me to my own devices once I had achieved a level of basic competency. I took saws and axes into the woods and made little campgrounds, far out of sight of my house. I hammered and dug and sawed and cut and created for years, often unsupervised.

In many instances, there was some risk of getting hurt. And indeed, I often scraped my knee, cut my arm, or got bruised black and blue. One memory stands out in specific. I was eight or nine, already proficient at using most of the tools in our workshop. On this day, I was trying to remove excess, dried-up glue from our hot glue gun using an X-Acto knife, unsupervised. While furiously scraping off the glue, my hand slipped, and I sliced a large gash in the pointer finger on my left hand. I still have the scar. Now, you might think that my dad was being negligent; indeed, he was working in a different corner of the house, with only the faintest idea what I was up to. When I revealed the cut, gushing blood, to him (I had already tried running it under cold water and bandaging it myself), he acted as any parent would - calm and collected, pouring hydrogen peroxide over it and wrapping it in a Band-Aid. But did he consider this a warning sign; a portent that I couldn't be trusted to use knives by myself? No. He said, "What was I going to do? Prevent you from ever using a knife again? You made a mistake, you got hurt, and you're smart enough to learn to not make that same mistake again."

Most of Rosin's article focuses on physical activities and risk-taking. However, I think this argument can be expanded, into online, social and emotional interactions (among others). For example, many homeschooling parents I've talked to have given me this argument in one form or another:

"My computer has parental controls and safe browsing activated, and my kid has very limited computer time, because the internet poses a danger, and they could become addicted to the computer."
I have a lot of respect for parents who choose to homeschool, because they're making a huge commitment, both in terms of money and time, to their child's education. But on this point, I completely disagree. Let me start with the argument about the internet. Yes, there are very unsavory places on the internet, along with malware and viruses. But in our modern world, your children will very likely be on the internet constantly, whether as part of their job or just their personal lives. Do you really want to keep them insulated, so that the first time they ever hear of any bad stuff going on on the internet is when they turn eighteen?

Instead, I'd argue that there should be a family discussion about internet safety, then antivirus software should be installed and the kid given free reign. Undoubtedly, they'll run into some of the "bad stuff", but if they know what to look out for, they won't get into any trouble because of it. Moreover, they'll have the online experiences necessary to be an adult in this world.

As for computer addiction, I think the same approach is justified. Computers are everywhere. You'll use one for many hours a day as part of a job or pleasure. All that needs to be understood is that by being online, you're trading away time that could possibly be better used elsewhere. I went through this process with gaming - for many years, I would game for five, six, seven hours a night. But as time went on, I started to realize some of the other experiences I was missing out on, and so I significantly cut back. Now, I game for an hour or two, if at all.

Moving on to social and emotional experiences, which can be lumped together, freedom to explore and make mistakes is even more critical. If kids go through their life without experiencing a relationship, or being in an awkward social situation, or talking about uncomfortable topics with friends, then they'll experience culture shock when they enter college or start working. Again, discussing safe and healthy relationships, and making sure that you're available to answer questions your kid might have seems like the best approach.

Having an insulated and protected childhood isn't a death sentence. Plenty of successful professionals will grow up in a similar environment, and will have a perfectly enjoyable life. However, I think it's fair to say that having wide-ranging, risk-filled experiences as a child can expand your worldview, and make you more aware of the possibilities in life and more willing to participate in them. It's also not black and white. Every parent has their own boundaries. However, for your kid, try pushing those boundaries out a bit, and letting them take risks and explore, whether physically, socially or emotionally. When they're adults raising their own children, they'll remember your decision in a positive light, and pass on those freedoms down the line.</div>