---
layout: post
title: Don't Stand in the Fire
spoiler: One gamer's experience with addition in World of Warcraft, and how it's not all bad.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Don't Stand in the Fire</p>
    <p class="date-p">December 23, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">￼
￼“Everyone good to go?”

I sat in my dimly-lit room, hunched over my desk, whirring MacBook propped up on a few pieces of scrap wood. My house was silent aside from the clicks of my mouse and my whispered instructions, parents asleep in the adjacent room, unaware that I was still awake. My alarm clock sat on the edge of my bed, neon green numbers shining into the darkness. It read “1:53”. It was Tuesday — raid night.

My avatar stood in an icy cavern, surrounded with twenty-four other characters, prepared for battle. Ahead of us hovered Lord Marrowgar, a skeletal, multi-headed creature wielding a bone axe, and also our opponent.

Once everyone else had confirmed that they were ready, I started a ten-second countdown on screen, and whispered, “Here we go!”

As the timer reached zero, I squeezed my mouse, and ran toward Marrowgar, sword in hand. He roared, and swung his axe at the nearest player. We all knew our positions in the icy cavern: Two “tanks” stood in front of Marrowgar, absorbing the brunt of the damage. I, and many others, stood directly behind Marrowgar, safely out of reach of the blades, our weapons hacking away at his frame. Everyone else spread out across the room, casting spells or firing arrows.
When fighting a boss such as Marrowgar, every second is life or death, and the entire raid often dies multiple times before defeating their foe. Although most of Marrowgar’s attention was on the two tanks, he would occasionally cast spells targeting the less-protected members of the raid.
￼
A warning flashed across my screen as Marrowgar bellowed, “Bonestooooorm!” He began to spin, until he formed a vortex of ice and bone, whirling around the room. Behind him stretched a path of blue flame, burning anyone left standing in it.

“Don’t stand in the fire!” I called out, forgetting to keep my voice quiet. As I remembered my sleeping parents, I stopped talking, and listened for footsteps in the hall.

When in the middle of battle, time flows effortlessly. Your attention is so focused on your screen that everything outside that rectangle of light becomes an unnoticeable blur. You control your avatar with your mouse, and cast spells with your keyboard: “Gendrial,” my character, summoned magic of frost and plague, her sword hacking at Marrowgar’s skeleton as I danced around the fire and avoided his axe.

As the fight wore on, Marrowgar’s health kept ticking down, yet he kept on fighting with the same gusto. After seven minutes of frenzied activity, Marrowgar crumbled, gasping out his last words: “I see... Only darkness...”
——
When I was eleven, I was a homeschooled kid living in the sticks of Maine, and a
longtime gamer. I had few friends my own age, a common side effect of homeschooling. My primary social connection was The Dragon’s Lair, a local gaming store, where I played Magic: the Gathering, a trading card game. I had found the store three years prior from a chance encounter with the local high school physics teacher, who owned the business.

It was at The Dragon’s Lair that I first met Eric, Jeff and Ben, a trio of twenty-something high school graduates, all working in my small town and playing Magic in their spare time. Soon thereafter, they became the older brothers I never had, idols of a sort. My parents liked them —
￼all three of them were unfailingly kind to me, never rude or vulgar, and they always took the time to include me in their activities.
In March 2010, Eric mentioned to me that he, Ben and Jeff all played World of Warcraft, the flagship game of the massively multiplayer online roleplaying game (MMORPG) genre, boasting over ten million subscribers. Always looking to spend more time with friends, I was immediately interested, but as an eleven-year-old, the price of the game posed a major obstacle. A hundred dollars up front, in addition to another thirteen dollars every month, was far beyond my budget. I went to my mother, the arbiter of household funds. She agreed to fund my new online pursuit, in large part because, “you needed some more pals, and this was what one of your good pals was doing.”

With that, my adventure as Volroth, an undead mage, began in the gloomy forests of Tirisfal Glades. I started in the courtyard of a decaying town, a necromancer welcoming me to the world of the living. I was given a set of worn cloth armor and a staff, and set out on my first quest. Within my first fifteen minutes I had tapped into one of the most alluring characteristics of World of Warcraft: Right from the start, I was an intimidating zombie, casting spells of fire and ice, fighting the eternal enemies of the undead race. My computer was designed for schoolwork, not online gaming, and was ill-equipped for a world with rich graphics and fast movement. But what it could handle was spectacular. Cobwebs hung from every beam, their artisans scuttling underfoot, a flickering candle illuminated the room with a yellowed glow — it was as if I was in one of the many fantastical worlds I had daydreamed of.

I quickly decided that being a mage was not for me. I explored other races — blood elves, trolls, and orcs — before settling on a blood elf death knight, an unholy paladin wielding a ￼blade imbued with magic of frost and plague. I spent every free moment adventuring through Azeroth, helping to turn the tide in centuries-old battles, gaining favor with kings, and slaying twisted villains.

Before I began playing World of Warcraft, I loved epic fantasy worlds, like those present in Lord of the Rings, Eragon, and Harry Potter. I spent hours drawing maps of my own worlds and concocting elaborate backstories. But here was another world, larger than any of those, and instead of just reading about it, I could inhabit it.

Azeroth, the online world in World of Warcraft, is immense — from questing to crafting, raiding to dueling, there is no “finishing” the game. Yet, after completing a relatively minor task, you feel as if you have accomplished something real, while simultaneously aspiring to go further and best new obstacles. As you develop your character, your sense of importance grows and your devotion to the game increases. In real life, I was a kid sitting at a desk in Maine, but here I could be Gendrial, Champion of the Frozen Wastes.

In many ways, socializing online was better than in real life. I could interact with people who would judge me only by how well I played, not my age or appearance. I never had to endure the company of unpleasant players, and I could wander off to a new part of Azeroth on my own if I wanted to.
For these reasons, I started spending more and more time on World of Warcraft. Every night, after the dishes were washed from dinner, I raced up the old, rickety stairs to my bedroom. Soon, Gendrial flickered into existence in Azeroth.
——
￼World of Warcraft is most enjoyable when part of a group. When I first began playing, Eric invited me to join his guild: “One Divided By Zero,” a group of players that talked, raided, and were otherwise a close-knit bunch.

At the start, I stayed aloof from the guild, afraid of being branded a “noob,” gamer-speak for an unskilled player. However, Eric had a surprise planned: A few months into my World of Warcraft career, he and a number of other players from One Divided By Zero took me through an easy raid so that I could collect loot and improve my character’s armor and weapons.

Soon, I began raiding on my own. I was not a skilled enough player to raid with One Divided By Zero, so I began with pick-up groups, or pugs. In a pug, the raid leader recruits a group of strangers, selected only based on the quality of their equipment and their prior experience. Unfortunately, you can’t expect much from a stranger, and people often bail out if the group dies one time too many.

I asked to join a few pugs, but nobody would take a new player. So I headed out on my own, and tried to recruit my own pug. I posted a message in chat, saying that I was looking for people to form a group. People began messaging me about their skill and experience, all of which was confusing. Should I invite a “250 frost mage w/ 4/4 exp,” or how about a “241 prot with full xp on main”? Over the course of an hour, I suffered many setbacks, but eventually guessed my way to a complete ten-man group, and completed the entire raid.

Over time, I gradually transitioned to the hardest raid of the day, Icecrown Citadel. I progressed through the raid slowly — pugs rarely slew every boss, with most admitting defeat only part of the way through. However, each Tuesday, the raid reset; bosses springing back to life as if dying once wasn’t enough.
￼
Around this time, disaster struck: One Divided By Zero disbanded. Most of the players transferred to another guild — Vanity Syndicate. I tagged along in the transition, and started to meet some of my online compatriots.

Effo, the guild leader, worked in a printing and shipping store in Montréal. He was a storyteller — late at night, the guild chat was often filled with long tales of his childhood. I remain close to him to this day, even though neither of us play World of Warcraft competitively any more.

Deamia, a world-class warrior player, was a guild officer. Asian, a sharp-tongued Vietnamese at school in Montréal, was the raid leader. Dortmunder, another Canadian, was in school to become an electrician.

Most people I knew only as acquaintances. Some chose to keep their real-world identity private, so rumors abounded. Nobody knew whether Ezno, a rogue, was a man or a woman. Another player, Deley, was thought to be a professor at a Midwestern college.

Cultural stereotypes about gaming might have you believe that these players were overweight, rude, reeking of body odor, and that they chose to sit in front of a glowing screen rather than interact with friends and family in real life. While there’s always one or two of those gamers in every crowd, most members of Vanity Syndicate were intelligent, mature, and had a full life in the real world.

Years after Ezno stopped raiding with Vanity Syndicate, I ran into him online, and learned that he is a student at University of California, Berkeley, studying astrophysics. Effo revealed that Deley is a microbiologist, and once taught English in Japan. Vespers, a paladin healer for the guild, is a graduate student in biochemistry.
￼
Every core member of Vanity Syndicate was kind to me. Sure, Ezno teased me for being young, and Eric nicknamed me, “Lil’ BB,” not my favorite title. But if I needed a hand with a quest in game, or a tank to help one of my pugs, all I needed to do was ask in the guild chat, and someone would hop on an alternate character and come to my aid. I didn’t give up a friend group when I started playing World of Warcraft — I found one.

It did not take long for me to become addicted to the game. I put off schoolwork, socializing, and sleeping just to battle through one more dungeon, obtain a better piece of armor, or finish off a long quest. I would often spend twenty, thirty hours a week adventuring. I was on the “lighter” side of addiction: Effo, along with many other core members of Vanity Syndicate, often spent forty to sixty hours online every week.

My father and mother were aware that there were potential pitfalls as well as benefits to the gaming world, but neither had expected me to become so attached so quickly.

Dad: “We knew that people would be swearing.”
Mom: “But I also had a pretty good idea that if things got bad, you would stop, or switch guilds, or whatever.”
Dad: “We had a pretty good sense too that you would wear it [on your face], you know, if it was stressful. We would know right away.”
It didn’t take long for them to begin to have doubts: “We had many conversations as to whether it was a good idea,” my mother said. “It wasn’t always roses. There were many times where we both thought, ‘He has to do other things — go outside, move, read a book.’ When you started, you went in really deep.”

But they identified something in my love of the game that I hadn’t seen until now:
￼“You also saw the amount of time that Eric was spending on it, which was this inordinate amount of time, and... And I think you admired that, that dedication to it. After a while, maybe you didn’t, but at the time, I think you did, because it paid off, it paid off in performance.”
It might seem silly, but the idea that I, an eleven year old kid in Maine, could be ranked internationally at anything was very appealing. I was competitive by nature, and had always wanted to be part of the adult world. Here was my opportunity: If I played enough, I could reach this revered level, and I could earn the respect of people I regarded as peers. To this day, years after I stopped playing World of Warcraft seriously, I still dream of being among the highest echelon of gamers in the world.
——
My decline in World of Warcraft was sudden. I had grown tired of leading pugs, and I
wanted to raid competitively with a guild. Vanity Syndicate’s raid roster was full, and so I looked to another guild, “Swagger.” However, they raided four nights a week, starting at eight and going until midnight. I knew I would need my parents’ permission.

In my family, “no” is a rare response. Usually, any decision is preceded by discussion, negotiation, and compromise. So it was a surprise when my mother instantly said, “No way.” I sulked for days, convinced that my life was ruined.

After a while, I came around when I realized that gaming couldn’t, and shouldn’t, be the center of my life. With the knowledge that I would never become a top-tier World of Warcraft player, I slowly faded out of the game. I didn’t give up gaming, though. After World of Warcraft, I switched to StarCraft II, which I achieved moderate success at, being ranked in the top three ￼percent of players in North America at one point. But my priorities were different. I no longer put gaming ahead of classes, and I spent more time fostering real-world friendships. However, I still kept in touch with Effo, Asian, Deamia and Dortmunder, all of whom played StarCraft casually.

Effo stopped playing World of Warcraft not long after me. For him, the tipping point was a conversation with a friend:
“You know, when there’s some guys, some guys that you have known since you were three years old or so, and at one point, you’re twenty-five... And you know, for once, they come on my Vent server [similar to Skype] and we’re playing this — I don’t even remember the game — we’re playing this game together, and they’re calling me by my name, and I’m just like talking with Deamia and Asian and I’m not responding, and at one point he goes, “Effo,” and I go, “What?” And he told me, he says, “It’s fuckin’ sad that I have to call you by your fucking nickname for you to answer me, like, I’m calling you by the name that I’ve been calling you for twenty-two years and you’re not answering me.” And he just left. And... And other friends, they were like, “Bro, we don’t hear about you any more, we don’t see you, the only thing we know is that World of Warcraft, World of Warcraft, World of Warcraft, server second, whatever, whatever.” So at one point I said, ‘Okay, well, that’s it.’”

Asian gave up playing when raiding got in the way of college. Deamia and Dortmunder still play seriously, and neither of them have any intention of giving up the game any time soon.

Here, you can see the real effect of World of Warcraft. It can steal a lot of your life — about two thousand hours, or 1.5% of the time I’ve been alive — but it does give back. I’ve made friendships that will last for years to come, and had experiences I look back fondly upon. I
￼don’t regret the time I spent in Azeroth; in fact, I miss it. I still have a competitive streak, and while I try to channel it into academics, it can never match the feeling of finally slaying a challenging boss after countless tries, or of winning a nail-bitingly close game of StarCraft, a feeling known as fiero:
“Fiero is what we feel after we triumph over adversity. You know it when you feel it – and when you see it. That’s because we almost all express fiero in exactly the same way: we throw our arms over our head and yell.”
    — Jane McGonigal, Game Designer and Author of Reality Is Broken ——

For some, the transition is easier. Zach Woessner, a classmate and fellow ex-World of Warcraft player, raided competitively with his guild, “Troubled Minds,” up until freshman year of high school:
“I was encouraged to set aside more time for World of Warcraft than I wanted to... They were upset with me when I couldn’t raid with them because I was the best raid healer in the guild. It was fun, until I told them that I wanted to do plays, and musicals, and that I was a freshman and I wanted to try new things, they were like, ‘Oh, are you gonna have time for us?’ And once, I said, ‘Yeah, I’ll have time for you after the play is finished.’ And so, [when the play was done] they asked, ‘Yeah, you coming back?’ and I said, ‘No, I liked it, I’m gonna try out for the musical.’ And they were like, ‘Aww, you shouldn’t do that,’ because they wanted to play with me. Well, I had goals of my own, and they kind of ignored that.”
￼
Zach stopped playing when he realized he had a decision to make: World of Warcraft, or theater. For him, it wasn’t much of a choice: “It’s not real life.”
——
I, and many other people in this paper, fit a common stereotypes about gamers: We
choose to spend time online instead of in the real world. But we aren’t unusual, not any more. According to the Pew Research Center, 97% of teenagers actively play games, and a study by Lifecourse Associates and commissioned by Twitch, a gaming website, found that 63% of Americans have played a game in the last two months.

I may have been unusually lucky in my selection of an online friend group— another Pew study found that online communities are often misogynistic, and generally more critical of others due to the anonymity granted by the internet. Yet, the community is evolving, and the rest of society is taking notice. eSports, competitive gaming, has rocketed to a multi-billion dollar industry, with the salaries for the best players reaching high six-digit figures. Thirty-two million people watched the Korean team SK Telecom T1 best China’s Star Horn Royal Club in last year’s League of Legends World Championship, about the same number of people that watched the 1986 World Series. Victory comes with a sizable prize — the winner of this year’s Dota 2 championship, China’s Newbee, took home over five million dollars. And Twitch, the most popular game streaming website, produces more traffic than Hulu, Facebook, or Amazon.
We need to make sure that our stereotypes of gamers evolve. “In many cases, we still see gamers portrayed as glassy-eyed addicts or isolated automatons,” Twitch announced. “Given how pervasive a pastime gaming has become, it should seem obvious that these negative characterizations aren’t true. And in fact, they’re completely at odds with who gamers are.”
￼
I have only recently come to embrace my identity as a gamer. For years, I hesitated to tell anyone of my time online, even when I was proud of what I had accomplished, for fear of being branded with these stereotypes. I struggled with the decision to put “online gaming” as an interest on my résumé, even when, compared to everything else on the sheet of paper, it had taken up largest portion of my time.
Gaming has the potential to be an immensely positive force in this world. The National Institutes of Health has promoted gaming as a potential tool against depression. Athene, a popular gamer who streams his games on Twitch, has raised more than ten million dollars for charity. And gaming has been shown to improve players’ ability to learn quickly, improve eye- hand coordination, and foster family closeness, positive mental health, and greater attachment to school.

We’re slowly coming to appreciate that the positives of gaming might, after all, outweigh the negatives. As gaming becomes increasingly popular, we’re finding out that gamers aren’t “them.”

They’re us.