---
layout: post
title: How to be a Tiger Parent
spoiler: Last week, I wrote about Amy Chua's new book about the trifecta of success. Today, I'd like to talk about her previous book, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother. Published in 2011, the book was a critique of Western parenting practices, and a chronicle of Dr. Chua's approach to Chinese parenting with her two daughters, Sophia and Louisa (Lulu for short). Tiger Mother has been critiqued as harsh, with some people even calling Dr. Chua's practices cruel. Before I talk in more depth, let me run through a brief analysis of the book.
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">How to be a Tiger Parent</p>
    <p class="date-p">Feburary 7, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">Last week, I wrote about Amy Chua's new book about the trifecta of success. Today, I'd like to talk about her previous book, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother. Published in 2011, the book was a critique of Western parenting practices, and a chronicle of Dr. Chua's approach to Chinese parenting with her two daughters, Sophia and Louisa (Lulu for short). Tiger Mother has been critiqued as harsh, with some people even calling Dr. Chua's practices cruel. Before I talk in more depth, let me run through a brief analysis of the book.

Amy Chua and her family have lived in a variety of places. Durham, North Carolina, New York, and New Haven. Both daughters, Sophia and Lulu, have gotten perfect grades in school since they started, and are several grades ahead in math. Sophia plays the piano, and was a soloist at Carnegie Hall at age fourteen. Lulu plays the violin, and has achieved similar success. But, unlike a Western family, they have no choice in the matter. Dr. Chua picked the instruments, attends all of their music lessons, and requires them to practice for as much as three or four hours a day. A grade below an A is not acceptable in school, nor are school plays, playdates, sleepovers, television or computer games. It does seem kind of dictatorial, but in the chronicle, Dr. Chua says that it's a fairly happy working relationship. She's incredibly proud of her daughters, but won't let them do any less than they're capable of. Sophia is the model Asian daughter by her metrics - obedient, talented, and requires little discipline. Lulu is the rebellious younger daughter, the one who broke Dr. Chua's will, and refused to conform to the perfect regimen set out by her mother, and became a competitive tennis player, much to Dr. Chua's horror. Nevertheless, both daughters are highly successful - Sophia will be graduating from Harvard next year, while Lulu is entering an Ivy this fall.

One thing to note is while the book can seem harsh, Dr. Chua writes magnificently. Nor is she the tyrant many have depicted her as - her book is a humorous analysis of her approach to Chinese parenting in a Western world. She has many great times with her children, and adopts many definitely non-Asian parenting practices along the way. She also loves her children, and would sacrifice anything for them - it's not wholly a tough love approach. Nor is the book written like a guide - Dr. Chua has said in numerous interviews that she wouldn't prescribe her approach. Tiger Mother is just a fascinating read about a way to rear your children that is wholly different than anything in the Western world.

Now, for the analysis. At the end of the book, Dr. Chua summarizes the Western-Chinese dichotomy as one of choice. In the Western world, parents believe children are capable of making their own choices, of experimenting, failing, succeeding and deciding for themselves. In contrast, as is exemplified by the entire book, Chinese parenting doesn't believe that children are capable of making appropriate choices, so it's all up to the parents.

I would characterize it differently. Every sacrifice made in the book is made for the future of the children. No playdates because you need to practice violin, which doesn't do much now, but later will bring you great success. Sacrificing enjoyment and choice in the moment for payoff down the road seems to be the name of the game for Dr. Chua. She says that by being successful at, for example, an instrument, it will bring success down the road, which only fosters enjoyment of your talent and encourages you to continue improving. So in a way, playing piano or violin is for fun, but only in the long-term.

On the other hand, allowing your children to experiment, to opt out of difficult choices, to have fun, to live in the moment - that's a very Western practice. And it's also very prevalent. We often hear the message in books, movies, popular culture: Live in the moment. Stop planning, and just let your hair down, a message we then apply to our children. But this short-term enjoyment may sacrifice in the long term, whether by reducing study time, or allowing a kid to avoid an extracurricular activity they might have been very successful at.

I'm not claiming that there aren't unsuccessful Chinese kids, or successful Western kids. To be honest, in the end, it all boils down to home life. If you have parents who are devoted enough to go through the ordeal that is Amy Chua's Chinese parenting, then they could probably take any parenting approach in the world and you would still turn out alright. The same goes for Western parents - if a mother or father will take the time to ensure that you're exposed to unique opportunities, that you taste the world and have fun, then you'll probably turn out okay, even if you get a B+. Or attend a sleepover.</div>