---
layout: post
title: Why We Need to Raise the Minimum Wage
spoiler: In a week, the G.O.P. will take control of both chambers of Congress, deepening the gridlock in Washington. Extrapolating from the last six years, I think it’s a safe bet to say that the Republican Party has little desire to compromise with their counterparts across the aisle, so new legislation will be a long time coming.
	That said, it’s holiday season, and we all need something to hope for. So what should America’s New Year’s resolution be?
---

<div class="title-div">
    <p class="title-p">Why We Need to Raise the Minimum Wage</p>
    <p class="date-p">December 27, 2014</p>
</div>

<div class="content-div">
	As the New Year approaches, America faces a host of social, economic and political issues. Full-time employees struggle to stay above the poverty line, and many receive food stamps. Medicare and Social Security costs continue to rise. We just began deregulating Wall Street, a mere six years after a catastrophic recession. Our political system is so infused with money that many of our politicians no longer represent their constituents. Immigration policy remains stuck in Congress, just like the immigrants stuck in legal limbo. Race-fueled social justice movements are on the rise, demanding accountability for the deaths of Michael Brown and Eric Garner.
	In a week, the G.O.P. will take control of both chambers of Congress, deepening the gridlock in Washington. Extrapolating from the last six years, I think it’s a safe bet to say that the Republican Party has little desire to compromise with their counterparts across the aisle, so new legislation will be a long time coming.
	That said, it’s holiday season, and we all need something to hope for. So what should America’s New Year’s resolution be?
	We should raise the federal minimum wage.
	Currently, the minimum wage is set at seven dollars and twenty-five cents an hour. A single parent, working forty hours every week for the entire year at this wage will earn about fifteen thousand dollars. For a household of two, the federal poverty line is $15,700. Consider what this means: A parent, working eight hour workdays, five days a week, won’t bring home enough money to rent an apartment, buy food and clothes, or keep a car on the road.
	And consider the effect on the child. According to a 1997 study by Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and Greg Duncan, children living in poverty had higher rates of lead poisoning, asthma, low birth weight, among other negative physical developmental outcomes.. In addition, the children in the study generally had poorer health, were more likely to drop out of high school, and were almost twice as likely to be unemployed when they were twenty-four.
	Alleviating poverty can improve the living conditions of countless Americans. But it can do a lot more than that. Families that face daily challenges, such as hunger, have little time to spend on the “luxuries” of life, such as education. Parents simply never have the time or mental energy to devote to tasks like reading to their children, talking about school, or looking over homework, no matter how much they would like to. As a result, children from poor households often struggle, causing them to drop out of school at a rate twice that of non-poor children.
	Some families have recognized the futility of living on minimum wage, and have given up looking for work. And who can blame them—working full time disqualifies them from government benefits, and gives them little more money.
	Raising the minimum wage could have benefits we don’t yet see. Having a more educated populace can only benefit the state of our democracy. And more income leads to more tax dollars for the government.
	Earlier this year, a bill to increase the minimum wage to $10.10 was defeated in the Senate, likely killing any chance of federal reform. Fortunately, some states and cities have already started the process. At the front of the pack is San Francisco, which has agreed to raise the minimum wage to fifteen dollars an hour by 2018. Following behind are states including Connecticut, Maryland, Hawaii, and Massachusetts. Some retailers, including Sam’s Club, Gap, and IKEA, have opted to increase their minimum wages independently.
	This New Year, let’s raise the minimum wage without Congress, and help struggling Americans put food on their table.</div>